      “~ 


. 
- 
, 
“ 
. qd 
, 
‘ 
a. cee wees - eye te eee Ge 
TR ee Weegee a wet dete ee tao ae me ae legeaca 


r 


SASKATCHEWAN 


THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS: 


TTT DY ARY-AND-NARRATIVE-OF-TRAVEL-SPORT,-—- — 
AND ADVENTURE, DURING A.JOURNEY THROUGH THE 
HUDSON'S BAY COMPANY'S TERRITORIES, 
“IN 1859 AND 1860. © 


BY 


THE EARL OF SOUTHESK.- 


K.T., F.R.G.S. - 


“ Here feel we but the penalty of Adam, 
The seasons’ difference, as the icy fang 
And churlish chiding of the winter’s wind . . . . 
And this our life exempt from public haunt 
Finds tongues ip trees, books in the running brooks, 
_Sérmons in stones, and good in everything. 
T would not change it."~—As Vou Like If, ti. 1. 


Bo 


ca 


Srnec nonheae soe MAP SAND TELUS THATIONB. ee To 


s 


TORONTO: JAMES CAMPBELL AND SON. 
EDINBURGH: EDMONSTON. AND DOUGLAS. 
1875., 


— 164147 
/ 


\- Se 


p 
» 


. rd 
te ™. ‘ ~! 
te 
eT ee me TT ee SEL te Ere Bee mae areca dere 
CT ca net a OM mt te a eg a catenin . 


TED pada eh rae TO 


+t 


7 ey “ 
— en ee 7 Se 
SASKATCHEWAN 


AND 


THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 


' t 
ae ec gen eect nn ote ee 
_ an 
‘A 
Mere 
- . ‘ ad 
Printed by R. & R. Clark . 
FOR 
EDMONSTON & DOUGLAS, EDINBURGH. 
LONDON . . . HAMILTON, ADAMS, AND co. 
CAMBRIDGE . . MACMILLAN AND CO. ° 
GLASGOW, . . JAMES MACLEHOSE. 
~ 
spare te ben wea Feet en oy EPO L fe. 
WA AS etre ag h ae Ga beaten od KEPT Athy ae 
otek teas . a OY 


‘ATTIVA AFZAIY HLYON—FISNOHTVd LNNON 


{ 


sedarnenmer pomienecoee aera na 
(‘zzz -d 99g) 


eee AG TTT TNTNTG 
aan | ia ua " 
PE CE eed Mean SAL al 
H lt ae bea Te ! 
i i 
Me 1 nA 
He al UAE H ‘y 
ale til 
A 
Hh 
AIR 
eth 
f 
Hl i 
| 
i) 
LA 
i 
i 
ral 
f ff 
i 


ia H 
ih et 


re 


ef] 


PREFACE. 
+ 

“Tue foundation of this book is a very carefully-kept journal, 
for the most part noted down evening by evening over the » a 
camp fire, and,'none of” it written, save a sentence or two, at 
intervals of more than — ‘a few days after the occurrences it . 
relates ; so that it has at least the merit of being a true reflex 
of the thoughts and feelings of the time, as well as a faithful 
narrative of incident, conversation, and adventure. 

In submitting such a journal to the public, three principal 
methods of dealing with it at once suggest themselves :—Jrst, 
To print it as it stands, without omission or change ; Second, To : 
preserve its form, but amend and amplify its diction ; Third, 
To recast the whole, and-frame it into a continuous story. 
The first of these methods is aliunost impossible where the 


' diary has not ‘been originally designed for publication, but, 


formless and uneven, exists as a mere assemblage of ill- 
balanced notes, abounding in rough disjointed sentences, dry 
repetitions, and frequent references to matters of a private 
nature. The third system is that which is now-a-days most 
in favour, and its advantages are great and evident ; yet it’ 
frequently leads to many small exaggerations, amounting in 
the ageregate to a large untruthfulness, and almost certainly 


removes the freshness and individuality that characterise 
a 


viii | PREFACE. 
\ 


- even the feeblest. of daily records ; in the present case, more- 
over, it would be more than usually hazardous, owing to the 
risk of any drafts on ‘memory or retrospective fancy, after so 
long a lapse of time. The second method is generally the worst 
"of all; it is apt to unite the meagreness of the journal with 
the inexactness of an after narrative, while presenting neither 
the freshness of the one, hor the smoothness and freedom of 
the other: to work on this system, though sometimes scarcely 
‘avoidable, is to invite trouble and run much risk of failure. 
_ After careful consideration, T have adopted a mixed plan, 
seeking as far as may be to combine the’ advantages of all 
these thethods: I have employed sometimes one of them, 
sometimes another, varying the manner of my treatment 
according to the demands of each-particular case. 

“My work, as it now stands, has been arranged on the 
following general system :—In certain parts, and especially . 
towards the beginning of the volume, I have, with large 
omissions, fused my journal into something of the narrative 
form, while preserving its order and partially retaining its: 
‘diction ; but where this has been done, I have endeavoured to 
make my intention clear, so that the reader may not be 
cheated into accepting the remarks of to-day as those of 
fifteen years ago, In other parts, I have followed my notes 
with some closeness, though not’ without more or less exten- 
Sive alterations in the phraseology and construction. In 
most parts, however, and especially in the latter half of the 
volume, I have made a literal, or almost literal, transcript 
from my diary, marking such extracts, when they occur, by 
single inverted commas. Verbal changes, transposition of 


~~ 
a 


PREFACE, ~~ ix 


sentences, and such-like trivial amendments, I have some- 
times, though sparingly, admitted, and in certain rare cases J 
have added a few words to explain or elucidate my meaning ; 
but with these limitations thé passages referred to may be 
relied on as-actual extracts from the journal, even in portions 
that might be fancied too’ full or elaborate to have formed 
part of the real diary of a traveller in the wilds. . 
“I do not, of course, attach value to the mere diction of 
. my journal, as possessing any merit or importanc in itself, 
but only“as affording a guarantee of perféct accuravy-so far 
as the writer could compass it. So careful, have I been to 
_ preserve an exact truthfulness—which to my mind seems more 
important in a book of travels than picturesque word-painting 
or luxuriant adornments of style—that wherever I have 
offered anything beyond the most slight or obviously recent 
“addition to the material existent in the journal, I have 
bracketed off such passages, however certain of their accuracy, 
lest some trick of memory should be leading me into con- 
fusion or mistake. ‘ OS 
In the Appendix, besides a few miscellaneous papers at 
the end, I have collected various passages from my diary, 
which bore but slight relation to the main story, while from 
their length, character, or position, they tended to impede its 
progress. Being chiefly memoranda on Shakespearian and 
theological subjects,—with recent additions, expanded in the 
case of Hamlet almost into an essay,—they are little calculated, 
I fear, to interest the majority of readers; some, nevertheless, 
may consider them worth perusal ; and for different reasons 
I was desirous to preserve those portions of my work, though 


PREFACE. 


relegating(them to a place whére they*heed not be found 


unless sought for. mi 
It #8 no definite purpose of mine to gather notes on 


subjects of a scientific nature, nor closely to record the geo- 
graphical features of the country through which I travelled ;. 


where, however, details of that class do happen to occur, I have 
thought it best to give them as they actually stand, without 
attempting to improve “them by private collation with the 


‘valuable works on the same part of northern America, which 


have appeared since the date of my journey,—every collation 
throughout the volume being distinctly pointed out, and 
very carefully acknowledged.* Superior in various important 
respects as some of these works must undoubtedly be to 
mine,—composed as they were by men of science attached to 
exploring expeditions organised by the British and Canadian 
Governments,—I cannot but remember that my information, 
however cursorily noted, was gither -gained by personal 
observation, or from sources’ so good, that, in cases of differ- 
ence (and a few such there may be), it is by no means 
impossible that I am in the right, and the more qualified 
author in the wrong, At all events, in such cases a com~ 
parison would be worth the making; so I have left the 
means of making it, instead of seeking to prevent disparities 
by the invasion of another man’s store, whenever his materials 
seemed better than those collected by myself, 


‘* I specially refer to the Reports by Captain Palliser’s expedition, and to 
the books or Reports by Mr, Hind, Lord Milton, Captain Butler, and the Rev. 
Mr. Grant. While my book owes exceedingly little to any of these more 
recent publicatigns, it is very largely indebted to Sir John Richardson’s admir- 
able Fauna Borealt- Americana (1829-31), from which (as will be seen) I have 


taken nearly all the zoological details that occur in the footnotes and elsewhere. _ 


e 


ROHEETE eee ere me 


PREFACE, ° xi 


As regards the maps which appear in this volume, the 
larger of the two—comprising my general route through the 
Hudson’s Bay Company’s Territories—sufiiciently speaks for 
itself, subject fo the explanation that it has been prepared by 
the Messrs. Keith Johnston, with special reference to the aspect 
of the country, in its boundaries, settlements, railways, etc., 
as existing at the period of my journey —vit in the years 
1859 and 1860. 

The smaller map, however,—illustrative of. my route 
while travelling in the Rocky Mountains,—demands perhaps 
more particular notice ; as ‘I am‘:personally accountable, not 
only for its artangement, but for the.details of a certain 
portion of the country, never befpre (nor probably. since) 
visited by any European. On thes points it may be noted, 
that the outlines of the map in question—which are of my 


own framing—have been composed b} 
principal maps in the Blue Books relating to Captain Palliser’s 
Expedition ; and that the newly explored valleys are laid 
down from a sketch made by me in 1860, while the memory 
of the localities was still fresh in my mind. 

I regret that circumstances should have prevented me 


adjustment from the 


from forming a better record of my explorations than a mere 
approximate sketch,—for even on unimportant subjects ac- 
curacy will often prove to be of value,—but, such as it is, I 


- offer it as sofne. small tribute f6 the treasury of geographical 
knowledge. 


‘As regards the illustrations, whether on separate pages or 
attached to the letterpress of the work, the greater number of 
these are derived from my own sketches and drawings ; the 


xii PREFACE. 


exception entirely consisting in those which have been repro- 
duced from photographs, or founded on them with some 
slight alteration. 
To the former class belong all, save one, of the illustrations 
" of scenery, every example of which may be relied on as a 
truthful though imperfect portrayal of Nature,—notwith- 
standing the roughness of my drawings, and the marvellous 
improvement in all artistic qualities which they have sustained 
under Mr. Whymper's skilful hand, 
_ To the latter class must be referred the various repre- 
sentations of animals’ heads, taken from skulls and stuffed * 
specimens in my possession; also several relating to other 
objects—viz., Led River Fire-bags,—Cree Whip,—Edmonton 
“Hunter's Day,—Assiniboine Fire-bagq, Enife-sheath, and Pipe, 
—all of which are engraved from excellent photographs by 
Mr. Rodgers, of Montrose ; and in addition to these the view 
_ of Minnehaha Falls, by Mr. Whitney, a St. Paul photographer, 
the only landscape for which my own pencil i is not originally 
responsible. 

Most of the smaller and less elaborate illustrations belong 

‘to the former of these classes, being facsimiles, or nearly so, 
of pen-and-ink memoranda hastily sketched into my journal ; 
the exceptions are as follows :—Buffalo-hide Line,— Whisky, 
—Snow-shoe and Shida, —sketches only recently prepared "y 
me expressly for the present volume, . 

I will not add to an already lengthened preface, by attempt- , 
ing to detail the causes which are answerable for so many 
years’ delay in the publication of these travels, nor by seeking 

_ to account for, or excuse, their publication at all under such . 


xili 


PREFACE. 


unusual circumstances—the work must vindicate itself, or 
fail; but, having offered the explanations that seemed abso- 
lutely needful, I now submit my book to the courteous reader, 

in the hope that, whatever the extent of its imperfections, it 

may still be found to possess some degree of interest, and to 


afford some new information in regard /fo a country not yet 
superfluously depicted and described. 


[It may be well to inform the reader that the word , Saskatchewan’ is pro- 
nounced with a strong accent on the second syllable—thus, Siis-kitch-é-win. 


ee 


2 & 


ERRATA AND ADDENDA. 


——- 


Pages 16, 17, 87, 88, for Dr.” Richardson read “Sir John” Richard- 

gon. 

Page 16, Hine 8 of footnote, for “Mr.” Sabine, read “ Sir Edward" 

Sabine. 

1: ‘416, line 2 from bottom of page, for “ Tetra Ph asiancllus, the adult 
male of which is described,” read ‘“‘ Controcercus Phasiancllus, 
the adult male of which is stated to be sixteen inches in 
length, while the Pinnated Grouse is described :” and page 
17, Mne 8 from bottom of page, before “ Phasiancllus” insert 
“ (Centrocercus),” 

Pages 26, 27, insert accent over “ Rivigres,” 

Page 27, line 11, after “‘ M‘Intosh ” insert ‘‘[? Mackenzie. See p.355.]" 
» 66, line 1 of footnote, for *‘ Mayhagan” read “ Mahaygan.” ° 
v 76, line 15, for ‘“‘whence” read “where.” ; 

»» 86, lines 1 and 2 of footnoté, for “‘ Mesaskatomena” read “ Misas- 
katomina ;” for Vol. I. read Vol. Li. ; for “ Aronia oyalis” 
read “ Amelanchier ovalis. Aronia ovalis—Rich. in Frankl.” 

1: 95, line 3 from bottom, for “rifle-bullet” read “ heavy bullet.” 

»> 108, bottom line of page, for “291” read ‘* 281." 

>> 187, line 1, for “31st” read ‘30th. 

2+ + line 3 from bottom of page, for “tainted” read ‘* scented.’ 

»» 167, line 3 from bottom, for “ model” read “medal.” 

>» 200, line 9, insert accent over “ épic.” 

>» 221, line 5 from bottom, for “ Encrinites” read ‘‘ Belemnites.” 

+1 233, line 2 from bottom, after “humble” insert “ gentle :” and. 
line 3 of following page, strike out “ of” before ‘‘ whatsoever.” 

>, 249, line 22, for “ half-dozen” read “ half-a-dozen,” 

’ 4, 265, line 2 of footnote, for “Wapoos” read ‘‘ Wawpoos.” 

2, 287, lines 5 and 6 of footnote, read “Sissee” and “Chippeway ” 
as in italics. 

», 294, lines 2,-and 1 of footnote, for “travaux” “travail,” read 
‘“travailles’”’ “ travaille.” 

r, 316, title of woodcut, for Skipor” read ‘‘SKIDA.” 

+, 370, line 4 of footnote, before ‘‘ chief" inseré “ deceased.” 

1, 386, footnote, for “271” read “228,” 

>», 388, line 3 from bottom, for “intimation” read “indication.” 

1» 391, line 20, for “grim” read “your.” 

2, 393, line 21, for “strong-headed” read “strong-handed.” 

»> 405, line 19, for “7 inhabit thee” read “1 inhibit thee.” 

sy 418, line 18, for “There’s Hector... there’s a fellow,” read 

_“ That's Hector, that, that, look’you, that ; there's a fellow 1" 


CONTENTS. 


—p— 


CHAPTER I. 


NIAGARA, LACHINE, ST. PAUL, CROW-WING. 
(April 15 to May 19.) 


Good Sport and Healthy Climate required—Mr. E--— siiggests the 
Hudson’s Bay Country—The Journey decided on—Voyage to America 
— Sir James Anderson — New’ York — The Delaware Valley — 
Beautiful Seneca Lake—Niagara—A Visit to the Falls—Hudson’s 
Bay House, Lachine-—Sir George Simpson—Departure for the Far 
West—Toronto—Mr. Paul Kane—Dr. Rae; his Arctic Journey— 
Western Men—Lake Michigan—Germans in Chicago—Aspect of the 
Country—The Mississippi Steamer—St, Paul, Minnesota—Rumours 
of Floods—Start for Crow-wing, but retarn—James M‘Kay, the Red 
River Guide: his characteristics—Captain Blakiston—Purchase of 
Horses, Waggon, ete.—“ Morgan” and “ Vermont ”—The Minnehaha 
Falls—Leave St. ‘Paul—“ Hyperborean Hotel”——Decline a Half- 
broke Runner—-Crow-wing City . . . Pages 1-12 


CHAPTER IT. 


CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. 
“x (May 20 to June 1.) 


Morning Start for the Wilderness—Happy Spring-tide—Men, Horses, - 
and Vehicles——*Portage of Miry Creek —Camp by the Crow-wing 
River—Boat-tetits—The Prairie-hen : Queries as to its name and 
designation — A ‘drunken Ojibway —Dangerous meeting with Les 
Pillageurs—Prairie in Flames—Lake Forty-four—Pelicans—Clouds 
of minute Flies—Breakfast-fire spreads—Fine View from Height-of- 
Land—A Waterspout--Violent Thunderstorm—Night Scene in a 


XxV1 CONTENTS. 


Flooded Tent—Cross Rice River in a Cart-whecl Scow—M‘Kay’s 
Energy — Wet and Weary Ride — Bittern-shooting—“ Running” a 
Bear — “ Blucher”— Crossing of Red Lake River— An Aimerican 
Pedlar — Mosquitoes in force: their Venom — Pigeon-stalking by 
Pine River—Frogs and Cranes and Doleful Swamps——Isolated feel- 
ings on a Vast Plain—Pembina—The Fort and its Fare—Uproar of 
Indians—Origin of term Saulteaux—-The Vieux Marais—A Woolly 
Horse and a Skew-bald Pony—~A Settler's Cottage-—Crossings of Red 
River—Arrival at Fort Garry . : . Pages 13-29 


CHAPTER UL 


FORT GARRY. 
(June 1 to 14.) 


Description of Fort Garry—Party at Dinner—Mr. Boyd—Sir George 
Simpson and Mr, Hopkins leave for Norway House-—Notice of Sir 
George Simpson’s Death—Distribution of Red River Population— 
Visit to the Nunnery—Dress of the Sisters—The Cathedrals and 
Churches—Prevalence of the Scottish Race—St, James’s, on the 
Assiniboine—The Church and Parsonage-—A Portrait of the Queen.” 
—~The “Ans Northup,” the first Steamer seen on Red Rivér—Indian 
Spectators— Encampment of Crees— Preparations for Expedition 
completed—The Men that formed the party—Vehicles, Stores, and 

’ Provisions-—Horses—Guns and Rifles . . Pages 30-39 


CHAPTER IV, 


8 
FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE. 
(June 15 to 27.) 


Expedition sets out-—- White Horse Plains ~ A Summer Mornine’s 
Concert—Purchase “Blond” and “La Framboise "Sunday Halts— 
An Unwholesome Camp—Mr. Simpson’s Visit—Rumours of Indian 
Warfare—Purchase “Bichon,” a Buffalo-runner—Destruction among 
the Trees — A “ Lob-stick.” —- Picturesqueness of the Hunters — 
Their Wives— A handsome Half-breed Girl—Spanish Saddle ~The 
Insect Pest—-The Retriever that would not retrieye—-Characteristics 


CONTENTS. ‘ xvii 


of the Men—The Little Saskatchewan-—~Meaning of word SasXatch- 
ewan——‘ Vermont "—Mischances—Death of a Skunk—-The Loon 
on Shoal Lake-—Re-arrange Armament—Vale of the Assiniboine 
Fort Ellice—-Mr. M‘Kay —~ Fresh Tongues —~ Indian Visitors — 
Route determined on — Nummed engaged as Guide — Four Buffalo 
Calves . . . . . . Pages 40-52 


CHAPTER V. 


. FORT ELLICE TO QU'APPELLE FORT, 
(June 28 to July 3.) 

Additional Stores —- “Pointer” the Pointer —- Pierre Nummé 
portrayed—tTent-life, its Charms and Harms—-Travelling Cree and 
his Wife—Target-practice-—-Nummé doctors his Gun—A fragrant 
Camp—A Wolf wounded—Cabree-hunting—Nummé’s Cutting-up 
Feat — The Cabree described — Great Creek — The Lake of the 
Valley—Short’s Skill with Gun and Bow—An Indian Emissary— 
Party from Quappelle Fort—Indian Horsemanship—Mr. Cardinal— 
Smoking Party at Qu'appelle Fort-—Visited by Ojibways—Visit their 
Camp—“ Spots-in-the-sky ” and “ Pointed-cap:” their different Be- 
haviour—Cree Whip—A Yellow-faced Indian—Dog-train astonishes 


the Ponies—A beautiful Sunset . : . Pages 53-64 
CHAPTER VI. 
QU’ APPELLE FORT TO THE INDIAN ELBOW. 
(July 4408.) = 


Departure from Quappelle Fort—* Hector” condemned and executed— 
A prowling Wolf—Varieties of the American Wolf—~A Cabree shot 
—The Qu’appelle Valley—Origin of the name Qwappelle—* Buffalo 
Chips”—Quirk, Gammon, and Snap—Wolf invades the Camp— 
, White Cranes—Stony Valley—Character of the Country—Tiger- 
"Ylies and Blue-bélls—Chorus of young Wolves——Chase of a white 
Wolf—Furnacelike Heat—The Sandy Hills—Cree notions about 
Heaven and Hell—* Pointer ” in Fits~Bull-dog Flies—Sufferings of 
poor “Bichon ”—“ Bichon” and ‘ Wawpooss,” their Whims and 
Oddities~A. Saline Draught—Good Water and Wild Garlic 

Pages 65-74 


xVili CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER VII. 

INDIAN ELBOW TO CROSSING OF SOUTH BRANCH. . 

(July 9 to 13.) we 
The Elbow of the South Saskatchewan: its Character and Scenery — 
The Aiktow River—Mr. Hind on the “ Elbow”: its Angle and its 
Water-width discussed—Feasibility of junction between Saskat- 
chewan and Qu’appelle—Recent Site of a great Indian Camp — 
Explore up-stream—Settle on Route—Nummé and his Contract— 
Banks of the Saskatchewan— Death of an aged Buffalo—Run a 
Ball, and shoot him—Indian Magic: “ Medicine Tent”: Conjuring : 
Second Sight: Charming a Gun—-Fine Cabree Shot—Its Horns— 
Charged by a Buffalo Bulli—His Death—Another Bull Slain, and- 
falls into River—A Wolf-chase on Foot—A Swim—Saskootoom 
Berries—Preparations for Crossing——Skin Canoes—Catlin on “ Bull- 
boats ”—-Bait-fishing—Fish that inhabit the Saskatchewan—White 
Fish in the Lakes , : . . Pages 75-88 


CHAPTER VIIL 


SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN TO CHERRY BUSH. 
(July 14 to 18.) 

Crossing of the South Saskatchewan—Swimming of the Horses—Traces 
of an Indian Camp—Wild Strawberries—An unfrequented Route— 
A sacrifice’ of Bull-dogs—Eagle Creek—Bad Habits of the Horses 
— Vast Herd of Buffaloes—The American Bison, its names, weight, 
and size-——Arrangements for a Hunt—The Start—Wawpooss gives in 
—Shoot a fine Cow-—Long Chase of-2 Bull—In the midst of the Herd 
—Death of the Bulli—Nummé in Ambush—-Horng of the Bull— 
Catlin on Buffalo-* wallows” — Old Bull pierced with fourteen 
Bullets—Mistaken for Blackfeet—Alarming Invasion—Tait and his 
men—Scaxcity at the Forts—Wolves routed by Moonlight—Marrow- 
bone Gamé:—Sleeping Wolf lapidated—Stalk Buffaloes on foot— , 
Bulls dangerous in the Rutting Season—Tents struck—-Over the 
Roasting Hils—A Badger—“ Black” turns restive—A Buffalo- 
charmer—Cherry Bush—vVisit from’ Tait and his Child—Napesskes 
—The Buffalo Ox—Run two Cows—* Bichon” lands on his Head | 

Pages 89- 107_ 


MO, 


PRR rg tea te 


f 


‘CONTENTS. xix 


CHAPTER Ix. 


CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL, FORT CARLTON. 
(July 19 to 25.) 


_ Departure for a Bear- hunt — Napesskes in his best—Plains alive ° 


with Buffalo—The Bad Hill—Anéédote of Indian killed by Bear— 
Search for Grislies—A “ Roe”—Female Bear and her Cub—Wound 
a Male Grisly—The Black-tailed Deer—Exploration of the Bad Hill 
—Enagle Hill Creek, its position on Map—-Buffalo-stalking—Bull 
protects Cow-—Scarcity of' pure Water-—Search for the wounded 
Grisly Hideousness of a Skinned Bear—Leave the Bad Hill—New- 
born Calf and its Mother—Old Buffalo Bulls like Lions—Another 
Ox—A long Running-shot—Carving out a Set of Harness—Hide- 
Lines—The last Run— Morgan” goes well—Shoot a savage Cow 
—-Wolves chase a Calf—The Prairie Wolf described—Roaring of 
Buffaloes—Buffalo-meat—Industry of Indian Women—Fashion in 
Beads—The Revolver unsatisfactory—Half-breed manner of loading 
—Visit of Crees from their great Camp—bBlackfoot War-parties 
reported—End of the Hunt~—Suecess considered good——Tents struck 
—Elbow of the, North Saskatchewan—lIron-ore Spring—Encamp 
near Fort. Carlton—Invitation from Mr. Hardisty—Drunken Indians 


‘inthe Camp . . . . . Pages 108-128 


CHAPTER X. 


FORT CARLTON TO FORT EDMONTON. 
(July 26 to August 10.) 


Ride to the “ Horse-guard ”—Parklike Landscape—Napesskes on a 


three-year-old—Nummé's keen eye for Number One—The Store— 
The Rum got rid of—Visit to Mrs, Tait—Present of Leather Hunt- 
ing-shirt from Mr. Hardisty-—The Fort described—Indian Women— 
Cross the North Saskatchewan—“ Pointer” and the Musquitoes— 
Fertile Plains—Prevalence of. Poplars—A cracked Meerschaum— 
The fat Dog “ Whisky ”—Cries of wild Animals—A Cart upsets— 
“ Lane's” Breaking-in—Smell of the Skunk : Heagne’s Notes thereon 
—dJack-fish Lake—~A Wolf wounded—Sunday’ ‘at White Mud Lake 


EX CONTENTS. 


—Lagrace appears—A burnt Prairie—* Wawpooss” comes down— 
Horse Hill—Fort Pitt—Messrs. Macaulay and Sinclair—The Dog 
nuisance—To the Horse-guard—Mr, Rowland—-Exchanges——The 
two Cendrés—Mr. Sinclair takes leave of his favourite—Fitting 
Horse-shoes-— M‘Kay shoots a large -Wolf——Smoke-fires for the 
Horses—Black Mud Hill—A tame little Bird—-Meet Mr. Hind— 
“Rowland” thinks himself in Hobbles—A magnificent Sunset 
Pages 129-146 


CHAPTER XI. 


FORT EDMONTON. 
(August 11 to 16.) 


Arrival at Edmonton—Mr. Brazeau—Rev,. Mr. Woolsey—The Fort and 
its Environs—Mountain Journey planned out—Cree Syllabie Cha- 
racters—An £18,000 Subscription—A Cree Idiom-——A Blackfoot 
stripped of his Goods—Authenticity of Catlin’s Indian Portraits— 
Town Critics on “ Travellers’ Tales ””—Intrusive Dogs—Indian Dogs 
deseribed—“ Mihekan”—Sleigh-dogs in Summer—Missionary Success 
among the Kootanies—A Blackfoot Chief on Polygamy—Comments — 
thereon—Father De Smet, with Comments—The red-dun Horse: 
its Hieroglyphics—Sunday Services—-A Laughable Interruption— 
Native Music—Horsemanship of Indian Boys—Antoine Blandcine 
engaged as Guide—Lapatdqne and the Fusees—Pe-toh-pee-kiss, the 
Blackfoot Warrior: his Adventure with Mr, Vanderbirt—Treachery 
of Bridger—Spaniard’s Infant carried off—-The Blackfeet: their 
three Tribes—Blood Indians—Cree and Blackfoot peculiarities— 
Scarcity of Halfbreeds in United States—Unchastity of Indian 
Women — Piskan - “Barve required as Interpreter — Edmonton 
Hunter’s *s Dag”. ¥, . . . Pages 147- 165 


, & 
"eS 


CHAPTER XL | *° 


FORT EDMONTON TO THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 
(August 17 to 81.J 


Departure from Edmonton —First Frosts of Autumn — Meet Mr 
Moberly: his advice as to Route—The ;Mission at St, Ann—Pro- 


e ” 


CONTENTS. . xxi 


testant and Roman Catholic Missionaries—Order and Comfort at the 
Mission-House, Its Books and Pamphlets—~—Purchases of Horses— 
Lac dea Isles—Horrible Roads—The Pembina and its Scenery— 
Buffalo Creek—-Meadow formed by Beavers——Struggle through 
Thickets—The Party dressed in Leather—Rifle-practice at Pigeons 
and “ Partridges "—The Spotted Grouse—First Sight of the Mountains 
—An Iroquois Family—* Muskegs ” and narrow Tracks—Difficulties 
~~Fatigues—Disturbance of a Wasp’s Nest—-Roast Skunk—Gastro- 
nomic Details excusable—Immense Firs and Poplars—The River 
M‘Lecd—Wife of Pierre the Iroquois—Her pied Mare: its-Bells—— 
Sheep Pemmican—Sun-light on‘a burnt Pine-forest—Through Woods 
and Bogs—Glimpse of two Mountain Peaks—La Riviére d’Embarras 
—“ Whisky” and Water—Sancho Panza of Dogs—Full view of the 
Rocky Mountains—Antoine’s Enthusiasm Gun-covers — Iroquois 
Hunters and their Horses— Tess of Pierre’s Baby: successful Doctor- 
ing-—-Indian Ideas of the Aurora—Horse-dealing—*“ Jasper ”— 
“ Moutonne ”——Poor “ Creme ”—-Part from Pierre—‘ Jasper’s” Merits 
—Cross the Embarras thirty-seven, times—The M‘Leod Valley— 
Assiniboine Camp-sites—Horses among fallen Timber—Separate 
Camp-fires begun—The Red River Men: their general goodness 
of Conduct . . . . |. < Pages 166-188 © 


CHAPTER XIII. 


MEDICINE TENT RIVER AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS. 
(September 1 to 10.) é 


The Rocky Mountains—Antoine makes a Fishing-rod—Arthur’s Seat— 
Axe-work necessary—Camp in a deep Glen—Wild Sheep at a dis- 
tance—The Mountain “ Whistler "—Ground-Squirrels—Climb after a 
White Goat—Siffleur Meat-——Medicine Tent River—Mount Lindsay— 
The Mountains of Rock: the Rivers : the Trees—Sudden Changes of 
Temperature—Camp near a Waterfall—The Dusky Grouse—Climb . 
the Height-of-Land—Raise a Cairn——“ Pointer” and the Porcupine 
—Grisly seen—Unsuccessful Chase—Two Siffleurs shot—Length of - 
their Skins—Antoine’s quaint Rifle—Shoot several Ewes—Munroe 
bridgs in a Ram's Head—Toma and the “ Saw-mill "Mark name on 
Tree—Description of the View—Head Streams of Athabasca and 
North Rivers—Southesk’s Cairn—Enter North River Valley—The 


xxii CONTENTS. 
“ Brigade ” on March : its Members described—Shoot Ewes and old 
Rams—Short meets a Bear—The way to encounter a Grisly—The 
Puma—Tea versus Stimulants—Shoot several Rams—The Wild Sheep 
described—A perilous Slide—A fine Ram leaps from a Rock— 
“ Arranging” the Slain—Dimensions of six Rams’ Heads—Reflec- 
tions on Slaughter of large Game—Snow-storm— Meditations — 
‘Titus Andronicus”——Climb Mountain Spur—Weary walk in the Dark 
—~Character of the Rocks—Fossils . . Pages 189-221 


CHAPTER XIV. 


NORTH RIVER CAMP TO KOOTANIE PLAIN. 
(September 11 to 18.) 


Mount Dalhousie—* Painted Lady” Butterflies—The Piping Crow— 
Vast Precipices like blocks of Masonry—A Meteor, and a Moonlight 
Scene—Counter-marches—Diflerences adjusted—Lances of the Forest 
—Sudden Death of a Horse—White Gouts—On the Cliffs in Dark- 
ness—Search for 2 Pass—The Ptarmigan—Difficult Travelling — 
Horses dragged up an Ice-bank—Track lost—QOver Height-of-Land 
between North River and North Saskatchewan—Small green Marmots 
—Robe of 125 Skins—Shoot five Ewes—About Moccasins—Art- 
instinct of the Savage—John Wesley’s breadth of view——Long March 
down a Glen—Pearly-grey Precipices—The Flying-Squirrel—Camp 
by the Saskatchewan—Shylock and his Judges—Kovtanie Plain 

Pages 222-235 


CHAPTER XV. / 
KOOTANIE PLAIN TO OLD BOW FORT. - — 


(September 19 to 30.) — 


Raft across the Saskatchewan—-The right Road to Bow River Illness of 
Munroe—Candle-making—Over Height-of-Land between North Sas- 
katchewan and Bow Rivers—Traces of Bears—Larches appear— 
A Miss—Memoranda for Stalkers—Ewe falls over high Cliff—Search 
for Wild Goats— Severe Chase—Dangerous Climb—A Lake in a | 


tay 


CONTENTS. xxiii 


Crater—Shoot two Goats—Mountain Goat described—Bow River 
—aAn extemporised Tent—Small Cump of Assiniboines—Provisions 
run short-——Dr, Hector’s Camp-site—Stony flat on summit of Moun- 
tain—A Moose bought from the Indians—Seriptural Passages copied 
out—Horses bouxht and exchanged—Presents to the Wives—Chil- 
dren play with young Horses—A Consumptive Patient—-The Ruffed 
Grouse—— The Mountain where the Water falls”—Letter in Cree 
syllabic characters—Bow River Vale : its fine Timber—Destruction 
of Trees in America—The Destroyers denounced—-Gale of Wind : 
‘Camp in a Wood——Moose-nose for Dinner : Pages 236-251 


? 


CHAPTER XVI 


OLD BOW FORT TO FORT EDMONTON. | 


(October 1 to 16.) 


Arrival at Old Bow Fort—Joy at- leaving the Mountains—Their Alti- - 
tude—Height of Mount Murchison—Drawbacks to Sport—Gloom - 
of the Deep Valleys—-Vestives of Buffalo—Decrease of their number 
—The Stonies—* Bounding Deer”—Ford the River on “ Jasper” . 
and ‘“ Moutonne”—Trout-—— Tremendous Gale—Tent falls—Find ' 
remains of Carts—Carts and Harness made—Camp of Assiniboines : 
their Hymn-singing: their old Preacher——- Troublesome Dogs— 
Worthiness of the. Mountain Indians : Present promised to them— 

"Her Majesty’s -Image—Horses exchanged—Again on the March— 
A really pretty Indian Woman—+Party of Ainerican Travellers— 
Mutual Aid—-Indian Improvidence—Musk-rats— Wild Swans—Cross ' 
Red Deer River—The American Hare—Run a Black Bear—Notes' 
on Sand-rats—Cross Battle River — Pike Creek: Beaver Dams: 
and felled Trees—A Foal emerges from the Thicket— Cloud Scenery - 
—A well-seen Dinner-—White Mud River—Arrive at Fort, Edmon- 
ton—Mr. Christie—Civilised Comforts—Reports by Captain Palliser’s 
Men—Parting with Antoine—Account of Horses kept, lost, ete.— 
Letter and Present to the Mountain Assiniboines — Their sub- 
sequent Sad Fate — Arrangements for further Journey — Amusing 
Intrusion of two Blackfeet—Announcement of the Approach of their 
Tribe . . . . . Pages 252-272 

b ‘ 


N 


xxiv a CONTENTS. }- - 


x 2 tn Oa 
was 
. UNE. 
CHAPTER “XVIL ——— 


FORT EDMONTON TO FORT PITT. 
(October 17 to November, 7.) 


Down the Snaskatchewan—-Melancholy—The Harbingers of Winter— 
The Crew of the “ Golden Era ”— Whisky’s”” Desertion—Snow- 
storm — Intensity of cvld——Frozen in — Messengers sent to Fort 
Pitt —Captain Palliser threatened by the Blackfeets~Wearisome 
Detention—Iced Blankets—Remarks on Lord Lytton’s My Novel— 
On Shakespeare’s balanced Characters—On Scott’s blemished Heroes 
—Milder Weather—On Historical Truth in Poetry—On Taciturn 
Heroes in Fiction—Monotonous Life in Camp——Deliverance at last— 
Sufferings and Courage of Matheson and Short—Journey resumed— 
The Art of Endurance—The 5th of November—Wapiti seen—Meet 
Messrs. Chastellain and Isbister-—Fort Pitt—Scarcity of Provisions 
there—Disease among Horses—Agricultural Capabilities —Colony on 
the Saskatchewan suggested—Position of Fort Pitt: a centre of Hosti- 
lities—Incident of Cree and Blackfoot Warfare—The Blackfoot Con- 
federacy——Smallpox Epidemic in 1870—Characteristics of Indian 

* Languages—A Blood Indian Woman’s Dress—Indian love for Rum— 
Value of Horses—Fight between Grisly Bear and Buffaloes—Anecdote 
of Grisly Bear and two Indian Hunters my Pages 273-291° 


f 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


FORT PITT TO FORT CARLTON. 


\ (November 8 to 19.) 


Departure from Fort Pitt—Winter Attire—Horse-sleds—Mr. Isbister’s 
Dogteam—Peril of an old Indian Woman—Stalk Buffalo at Horse 
Hill—Turtle River—Meat from a Hunter’s Staze—Winter Trans- 
formations of a Landscape—On the Ice of Jack-fish Lake —A 
starving little Indian Dog—Thirty below Zero—Meet the “Green 
Hands ”—Fiery Light on Snoiw-clad Hills—Blinding Snow-storm : 
Track obliterated—Salt Lake—Buffuloes seen—Innumerable Lakes 
—Arrival at Fort Carlton‘ Morgan ” and “ Vermont”—Exchanging 


CONTENTS. XXV 


. of Horses-—* N ed,” the Blackfoot ae oosing Horses—Choking _ 


> 


—Mr. Hany Cont Farewells me . Pages 29 2-300 


\ 
‘ 


CHAPTER XIX. 


"FORT CARLTON TO TOUCHWOOD HILLS. 
(Nov ember 20 to 29. ) 


eee 


Cross the South Saskatchewan—Country scems fit for Settlement— 
“ Berry Pemmican, "=~ Pemmican characterised—Unreasonableness 
of Indian Horses—“ Conciliation "—- Ode to Rae Wilson, Esq.”— 
Exhortations to Horses—Cendré strays—-An Ancient Family’s Doom 
—Tent-pitching—Fire-building and Fuel—-Explosiveness of Poplar 
Logs—Fox-running in the Snow—A timely Header—When Fur is 
“prime "—The Preparation of Buffulo Robes—Two False Suns— 
Benighted on a bare Plain—Arrival in the dark at Touchwood Hills — 
Mr, Taylor—European News— Snow-storm-——Comfort at the Fort— 
Danger incurred when at the “ Elbow ”-—Crees and Blackfeet at War 
—Savage Trophies—-Report of Murder of the Party by Blackfeet 

Pages 301-311 


CHAPTER Xx. 


TOUCHWOOD HILLS TO FORT PELLY. 
(November 30 to December 8.) 


Leave Touchwood Hills Fort— Jasper” left behind: his Death— 
Intensity of the Cold—Agamemnon’s Speech—Power of Shake- 
speare’s words to strengthen the Spirit—First Trial of Snow-shoes— 
Horses unfit for Winter Travelling—Cold crushes Fire-—Half-way 
to Fort Pelly—A Winter Bill of Fare—Snow-shoes described—Lap- 
land Skidor—Slightly Erost-bitten—Sufferings of the Horses—Two 
of them give out—-Farewell to Cendré! his successful Struggle— 
The Guide Frost-bitten—On Gratitude and Ingratitude—True Prayer 
not a demand — Cendré stops again— Camp by the Assiniboine 
—Fine Spruces—Narrow Escape from a falling Treé—Ride to: Pelly 
Mission-house-—Mr. Murray’s Doy-carivle . Pages 812-321 


xxvl CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER XXI 
} : FORT PELLY. 


(December 9 to 26.) 


: Site aud Aspect of Fort Pelly-—-The Peaccable Saulteaux —Tlie River 
! Assiniboine —Lord Lytion’s “JIaunters and Haunted ” — Horses, 
Cattle, and Farm—Sunday Service—The Rev. Mr. Settee—John 
Newton—Slow Evangelisation of the Indjans—Game in the District 
—Manners and Customs of . the Wolverine—Old “ Clippy ”—The 
Company's, dealings with the Indians — Spirits not a medinm of 
Barter—“ Régales ’ Distinction between the Company’s position in 
the Northern and Southern Districts —A Mulatto’s Birthday — 
An Indian objects to the Missionaries’ Paradise—A Woman’s Grave— 
Her drunken Husband—A Mourner in the Mounfains— Indians: their 
‘ liability to Ilness——Their “ Medicine-men ” bad Physicians but good 
Surgeons— Anecdote of two Trappers slain by Sioux—Controversy 
between a Catholic dnd a Protestant—Bitterness worse than false 
Doctrine — Unsuccessful Beaver-hunt — Beaver Meat — Artificial 
Boundaries’ unsatisfactory, —- Probable future Boundary between = 
British Territory and the States— Lake Winipeg and the North 
————-—-Saskatchewar the tie Rowe trom Canada to the Pacii¢—Mr. 


Dawson's Map-—Commiunion Service at the Fort Pages 322-333 
—— / 


a a CHAPTER XXII 
FORT PELLY TO FORT GARRY. °, _ 
(December 27, 1859, to January 8, 1860.) —: 7 


Departure from. Fort Pelly—M'‘Kay and Short remain—Dog-cariole 
and Dog-sleds—Kline becomes Guide—Accident to M‘Beath : his 
Unele j joins an carly Breakfast-—Mid# winter at the Mackenzie River 
—Kline’S Snow-shoes—Frost Leside Fire : Icicles on “ Othello”— 
Crossing of Swi an Lake—Check to a Frost-bite—Eneimpment among 
snow-clad ~ ‘Pines—The Old Year buried, and the. New Year born— 
On Lake Winnepagos—A Team of Indian Dogs—The Driver’s Voca- 


_ and Manitobah: their Extent and Character-—Parts of the former . 


CONTENTS. xxkvil 


bulary —Cruelties practised: on Sleigh-dogs—;Interpose on their 


’ behalf-Duck Bay—The Log-house and its Comfort—Winnepagos 


crossed—Peninsula between it and Lake Manitobah—A Saulteaux 
buried alive there—Martyrdom of a Roman Catholic Priest—Rough 


Roads on Frozen Lakes—Meet Le Rond—Sir Francis Sykes—Hate- _ 


fulness of Carriole travelling—Manitobah Fort—Lakes Winnepagos 


Saline — Mr. Monkman’s Hospitality — A warm Room— Ok Woint: 
—Roman Catholic Mission-house—Literers by the Way—Hardihood 
of Kline and Taylor— Eighteen Hours’ Journey to White Horse 
Plains—-Costume of the Half-breeds-—Settlers’ Architecture-—Mr. 
Rowand’s handsome Hoise—Janies M‘Kay in his Cariole—Arrival at 
Fort Garry . oC. . . . . Pages 334-350 


CHAPTER XXIIL 


FORT GARRY. 
(January 9 to 24.) 


Society of Old Friends—Bishop’s Court—The Nor-Wester:” the 


firs; Néwspaper published in the Settlement—The License Laws— 


De ee Dep A . 
Meeting on Religious Revivals—Address the Meeting: Errors of 


_____Snow-:—his. Funeral —Servicc—at-the-Protestant Gathedral—Rev-Mr— - 


» moral and physical—Scottish Settlers—Population almost halved 


some Revivalists: George Herbert quoted—Christianity among the 
Assiniboines—Rev. Mr. Woolscy’s Letter—Mr. Mackenzie lost in the 


Black of the Free Church—Laws against selling Spirits to Indians— 
Agriculture — Cattle — Marshes — Drainage — Scarcity of Wood — 
Labour — Scottish and French Half-breeds: their characteristics, 


between ‘Protestants and Roman Catholics—Population of Province 
of Manitobah in 1872 — English Settlers and their Wives — The 
Editors of the “ Nor’-Wester”—M'Kay and Short arrive from Fort 
Pelly—Service in St. James’s, on the Assiniboine—Infantine Disturb- 
ances in Church — Take leave of the Red River Men —Farewell 
Commendations—The Bishop of Rupert’s Land and Miss Anderson— 
Mr. Mactavish : Sorrowful N: otice of his Death Pages 351-365 


# 


~ 


xxviii CONTENTS. 


uw 
“on 


loaotee CHARTER, XXIV. 
v- tee a ste 
we ye FOR GARRY, "29 ENGLAND, 


eet 


” 


 Sanuary 85 ‘to February 19.) 


Departure from Fort Garry—Mr. Fortescue—Sheet of Electrical Flame 
from Buffalo-robes—Kline makes a long Day’s Journey—Pembina 
Supper and Ball at M. Rolette’s—Snake River: Trees cracking 
from Frost — Arrive at Otter-tail City-- Hospitably received by 
Colonel Sawyer — Lake Otter-tail : the Source of Red River — Leaf 
Lake City-——Eclipse of the Moon—-Crow-wing City—Larne’s Tavern 
—“ Hole-in-the-day,” the Ojibway Chief: his Drunkenness and his 
Wealth—His warlike Predecessor—Crow-wing to St. Paul—Arrival 
at New York—Hospitable Friends—Sir Edward Cunard offers a 
Passage in the “ Etna’”—Sir James Anderson—Voyage Home 

Pages 366-371 


APPENDIX. 
PAGE 
Remarks on “ The Winter's Tale”. . . 373 
” “Hamlet” 2 
on cet . . . 408 
» “Merchant of Venice ” ~ - 406 
” “ Othello” . . : - 409 
———~—-——Céinients ona Sermon. . . . 418 
Reflections on Patience and God’s Providence : 415 
Comments on Bunsen’s “Hippolytus” = ws AT 
Letter from Rey, Thomus Woolsey. . . 420 


SUA 


Tuk rr ~ 


ud. peae 


IN ae 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


—_—+— 


ed 


seg eree ts 


Heap or «4 Burrato Butt 


Mount Datyouste—Norta River VALLEY 


SURVEY AND Eye-SKEtcH or THE ELBOW . 


SEPARATE ENGRAVINGS ON WOOD. 


Frontispiece, 
To face page 77 


i 96 
; THE Rocky Mountains, FROM THE EMBARRAS River 180° 
1 Mount Linpsay—NEAR MEDICINE Tent RIver . 193 
: Vimw FROM Camp in Mepicine Tent VALLEY 201 
' } Heap or A Rocky Mountain Ram 215 
a nnn 
ENGRAVINGS IN THE TEXT. 
“Min es Ta emma = or a — 
WArersrout 21 
’ CaRT-WHEEL Scow 23 
| Rep River Firg-sac / 39 
‘A Lop-stick a 44 
Harr-srnep’s SPANISH SADDLE ‘ 45 
"Cnn PATTERN 59 
' Orne WHIP . 64 
“Heap oF A CABREE ° 83 
(SKIN-CANOE FRAMES 88 


N 


XXX LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


SKULL oF A Burrato Ox. . 
BUFFALO-HIDE LINE 
. Epmonton Hunter’s Dac 
Skunk Roasting 
Wooden Srur 
WuISky 
~ Mountain iv Mepicine Text VALLEY 


ASSINIBOINE PIPE AND STEM 


ASSINIBOINE KNIFE-SHEATH AND FIRE-BAG 


SNOW-SHOE AND SKIDA  . . 


Kutvz’s SNow-sSHOES 


Rep River Frire-Bac 


. 


LITHOGRAPHS. 


LETTER FROM THE MOUNTAIN AsSINIBOINES To face page 250 
a GREE BABE CB OTERS 
-- MAPS._ = 


ween ar mera bn Rene 


SKETCH Mar oF PART OF THE Rocky Movnrains To face page 234 


Rovte Map rrom Crow-wixe to Rocxy Mountains . End 4 


CHAPTER I. 
NIAGARA, LACHINE, ST. PAUL, CROW-WING. 


TOWARDS the close of 1858, while visiting at the house of 
a friend, I happened to mention my desire to travel in some 
part of the world where good sport could be met with among 
_ the larger animals, and where, at the same time, I might re- 
cruit ‘my health by an active open-air life in a healthy climate. 
\ “Why not go to the Hudson’s Bay country?” said one, 
who of all men was perhaps the best qualified to speak, 
exercising as he did a very powerful influence in the councils 
..of the great Company that dominated those enormous terri- 
_-tories in“British_North-Ameries —“The-country—is- fait of 
large game, such as buffalo, bears, and deer; the climate 
exactly what you'réquire. If you decide on it,” continued 
. Mr: E-==-“T-will write to the Govemor, Sir George Simp—— 
: son, and ask him to.advise you as to your plans and arrange- 
ments. On the part- of the Company, I can safely promise 
you every assistance it is able to give.” 
The more’I considered this proposal, the better it, pleased 
me. Such an opportunity seemed far too good to bé lost ; 80, 
not long afterwards, I renewed the subject in correspondence 
with Mr. E. , and with many thanks availed myself of 
his tempting offer. - , 
It was settled that my departure should be towards the 
end of the following spring, so. as to enable me to meet Sir 


[ + . 
v , . 
. \ 


2 - NIAGARA, LACHINE, CHAP. 1 


George in Canada, in time to accompany him thence in his 
annual journey to Fort Garry, the capital of the Red River 
Settlement. This place was to be the base of my own inde- 
pendent expedition to the plains and mountains of the Far 
West. ° 

On' the 15th of «April 1859 I sailed from Liverpool i in the 

Cunard steamer Africa, then under the command of Captain 
. Anderson.* She was a paddle-wheel vessel, and, though not 
fast, had the merit of being more steady in a rolling sea than 
screw-steamers usually are. However, I was not sorry to 
leave her, when, on the afternoon of the 28th, we made our 
arrival at New York. , 

J found myself most comfortable at the Brevoort House, 
an excellent hotel in Fifth Avenue, recommended to,me by 
Mr. K——, a fellow-passenger, to whose kindness I was in 
many ways indebted; but I did not linger long in the 
bustling city, though very hospitably treated there, having 
little business to detain me, and being anxious to make sure 


of reaching Lachine before Sir George’s departure, no certain 
‘date having been fixed ‘for the commencement of his official 
~--journey=—t-resolved=however, that-nothing- should. preverit> ___ 
“ne” from visiting” Niagara ; and in “adoptiig” this pla T—~ 
gained the advantage of companionship for part of my way, 
by travelling thus far with Captain Anderson of the Africa, 
who had some little time’to occupy before his return voyage, 
aud was glad to employ it by joining me in an expedition to 
the Falls. ' 
Monduy, May 2d—We set out at an early hour, making 
our journey by the Erie line, which, after some consideration, 


* Now Sir James Anderson; knighted for his services in ‘connection’ 
with the laying of the Atlantic cable, when cuptain of the Great Eastern, 
in 1865. em eee 


CHAR, 1. ST. PAUL, CROW-WING, 3 


we had chosen in preference to the Hudson River route. I 
know not if we judged rightly, but at the time we saw no 
reagon whatever to regret our choice. ‘The Erie line is very 
+ beautiful’—so runs my journal. . . .‘I stood on the platform 
outside the carriage for more than an hour, as we went up 
the Delaware vale, where the scenery is lovely—river, rock, 
and hill, and endless forest, broken only along the wate}-side 
by settlements and partial clearings. é 

‘ After leaving Elmira we came to the Seneca ake,—long 
and narrow, like a vast river, with its clear blue water 
bounded by hills displaying well-arranged farms, mingled 
with woodlands so skilfully disposed by nature as to seem as 
if placed by the hand of ‘some wonderful landscape-gardener. 
The sun shone gloriously, and I thought that a more en- 
chanting scene of placid, smiling loveliness had never met 
my eyes.’ . ; 
- May 3d.—Having passed the previous night at Rochester, 


__the farthest point the trains enabled_us to reach, we only 


arrived at Niagara about 11 o'clock. The Clifton Hotel was 
- not open, so we took rooms at the Monteagle, a newly-estab- 
lished hotel near the Suspension Bridge, and then set forth 


Ol Our expedition to Déehold the Wonders of the mighty cata- ~~ 


ract. 

‘We looked down from: Table Rock, we climbed under 
the Canadian Fall, we visited the ‘burning well, crossed over 
at the ferry, stood at the foot of the American Fall, explored 
Goat Island, and ascended Prospect Tower. . 

As to the Falls themselves, I was neither greatly astonished 
nor much disappointed. — “Guided by drawings and descrip- 
tions, I had imagined beforehand something very near the 
reality, except that the width was greater and the height less 
than I had expected. I have now seen the famous Niagara, 


4 


4 NIAGARA, LACHINE, CHAP. f. 


and honestly confess it would give me little concern never to 
see it again, It is too huge, and the disgustingly obtrusive 
civilisation that crawls over its sides turns my very heart sick. 
A small name on a map is more easily found than one in letters 
of excessive size, and so a narrower, higher cataract. would 
strike more sharply on the mental vision, than low-statured, 
wide-spreading Niagara. Seneca Lake is more lovely and 
lovable than an endless stretch of becalmed ocean. Be it not 
supposed that I felt no delight in the beauty and grandeur of 
the noble cataract. No one could fail to be impressed in 
beholding an object so sublime, but the impression rests 
rather on the mind than in the heart, ; 4 
‘Besides the other drawbacks, tlie rock formation at and 
near the Fall is poor both in coléur and outline : but it is the 
all-pervading valgarism which surrounds it that makes the 
‘ whole scene distasteful to me—so far as such is the case 
The Canadian side is not strikingly offensive, but the Ameri- 
——~¢an side teems with glaring wooden structures hanging over 
- the very precipice, down which, moreover, a staircase enclosed 
in a hideous wooden box conducts the public to the ferry-boat, 
“or to a small steamer which fizzes about as close to the cata- 
ract as it dares to go. Some wretched person has built a 
mock ruin on a little island that actually overhangs the Fall.’ 
May 4ih—I took leave of my companion, and going on 
alone by rail to Kingston, on Lake Ontario, and thence by 
steamer down the St. Lawrence, I arrived at Lachine in good 
time on the evening of the following day. 
Sir George Simpsgh welcomed me very cordially to 
Hudson’s Bay House,-Where a room was put at my disposal ; 
_and in this Jarge, plain, comfortable dwelling, I passed the 
next three days, which were made most agreeable to me by 
the hospitable attentions of Mr. and Mrs. Mackenzie, then 


" CHAP. I. ST. PAUL, CROW-WING. 5 


permanently resident at that Post. I also received much 
‘kindness, in various ways, from many different quarters. 

Monday, May 9th.—We fairly set out on our journey 
towards the distant regions ‘of-the west, making our departure 
from Lachine about 6 A.M, by the early morning train. The 
party consisted of Sir George Simpson; Mr. Hopkins, his 
secretary ; and Mr. Cameron, an officer in the Company’s 
service,—who was only going with us to ‘St. Paul. Our 
attendants were four in nuober Faas Murrey Sir George’s 
servant, a Shetlander; my own man, nm Robertson, a 
Perthshire highlander, who acted as one of my gamekeepers 
when at home: in Scotland ; lastly, Baptist and Toma, two 
Troquois voyageurs, who had been constantly employed as 
Sir George’s canoe-men on his previous expeditions to Red 
River by the usual Canadian route. 

That night we slept at Toronto, where, at the Rossin 
Hotel, we were met by Mr. Kane, author of The Wander- 
ings of an Artist in North America, also by Dr. Rae, the 
well known Arctic explorer.* The latter was to travel with 

* T cannot resist the temptation to quote the following most appropriately 
worded passages from a very interesting and’ graphic volume published in 
1848.“ The stranger introduced himself as Dr. Rae. He was on his way to ° 
York Factory for the purpose of fitting out at that port an expedition for the 
survey of the small part of the North American coast left unexplored by 
Messrs. Dease and Simpson, which will then prove beyond a doubt whether 
or not there is a communication by water between the Atlantic and Pacifie 
Oceans round the north of America. Dr. Rae appeared to be just the mari 
“I for such an expedition. He was very muscular and active, full of animal 
spirits, and had a fine intellectual countenance. He was considered, by? ithose 
who knew him well, to be one of the best snow-shoe walkers in the (H. B. 
Co.'s] Service, was also an excellent rifle shot, and could stand an immense 
amount of fatigue . . . There is every reason to believe that this expedi- 
tion will be successful.” In a fovtnote, the writer adds—‘‘Since this sheet 


was prepared for press, I have heard of the return of Dr. Rae from his suc- 
cessful discoveries.”"—BALLANTYNE, Hudson's Bay, p. 225. 


6 NIAGARA, LACHINE, oune.t. 


us on the following day, but only as far as Hamilton ; he 
hoped, however, to join us afterwards at St. Paul, and thence 
accompany our party to Red River. 

Having passed Tuesday night at Detroit, we set off for 
Chicago by morning train on the 11th.—‘A very fine hot day. 
The trees, which in the easterly Canadian districts were leaf- 
less, are here half covered with foliage. The farther west we 
go, the finer seems the land and the more flourishing the 
towns. A few western-looking men got into the train,—tall, 
powerful, active, of the lymphatic-sanguine type. Each 
carried a long rifle, and wore a wallet on his back. Fine 
cattle. (like Herefords) to be seen after crossing into the 
States. 

‘Chicago is a finely built town of 120,000 inhabitants. 
It is situated on Lake Michigan—a true inland sea. To-day 
the water was smooth as a mirror, and-of a beautiful colour 
between blue, green, and grey. While taking a sherry- 
cobbler at the bar of the Richmond Hotel, I talked to the 
German who keeps the cigar store there. He tells me there 
are from 30,000 to 40,000 Germans in this town ; but, for his 
part, he says, he wishes he were back in Hanover? 

May 12th.—Leaving Chicago in the morning, we travelled 
by way of Madison and Prairie du Chien, and embarking in 
the Milwaukie steamer, pursued our journey up the stream of 
the Mississippi. River— The country after leaving the Chi- 
cago prairie is undulating: of limestone formation, producing 
stunted oak instead of the pine and soft deciduous wood of 
Canada. The snake-fence is less common here, and owing to 
its absence, and the use of plain post and rail instead, also to 
the prevalence of oak copses, the landscape looks far more 
English: The whole country is now much flooded, the water 
being higher than has been known since (I think) 1826. Sir 


onay. 1. ST. PAUL, CROW-WING. 7 
J 

George doubts if we shall be able to get on beyond St. Paul,— 
it will be a wet ride at all events. The Mississippi was in 
high flood, submerging most of the willows that grow-on its 
banks, which themselves are a series of picturesquely wooded 
hills, with horizontal strata of limestone rock cropping out 
here and there.’ 

We arrived at St. Paul, the chief town of Minnesota, at 
11 p.m. on Friday ‘the 13th, and put up at the Fuller House, 
an immense but not uncomfortable hotel of the regular 
American type. 

May 14th.—Sir George was made so uneasy by continued; 
rumours that the country beyond Crow-wing was impassably 
- inundated, a notion which the flooded state of the ‘Mississippi 
seemed to confirm, that he began to talk of returning, and 
canoeing it as usual by Lake Superior, instead of attempting , 
the new route. We hardly supposed him in-earnest, and at 
any rate expected to stay a few days ‘longer, on the chance 
of the arrival of the Red River men who were bringing us, 
carts and horses from Fort Garry; to our great surprise, 
however, he suddenly announced his resolve to set out that - 
very afternoon, giving us only three hours to complete our 
preparations. He had heard that Kitson, an American fur- 
trader, whose party had left just two days before for the 
north, was still halted at Crow-wing, aboit 130 miles distant, 
‘and, dreading the floods, it was his intention to try to over- 
take him, so as to get help from his people in crossing the 
many swamps and rivers that lay in our road. 

* So early a start was most inconvenient’ to all of us;for-— 

we had reckoned on time to make a few necessary purchases. : 

I was by far the chief sufferer, having much to provide 
myself with for my long future journey ;—I wanted to buy , 
horses, I required a waggon and double harness, and various 


8 . NIAGARA, LACHINE, char. 1 


other things not likely to be got so well, if at all, elsewhere. 
My guns and saddle too, which were on their way from _ 
Canada in bond, had not yet arrived,—but there was no help 
for it, we were all beund to obey our leader, even if we 
thought his decisions doubtful or mistaken. 

“At 3PM. accordiigly, we all set out in a roughly built, 
but light and easy waggon and four, with ranges of seats in 
the char-a-bane fashion, and a stout canvas tilt .and curtains 
protecting us around and overhead. © Our journey, however, 
was destined to a speedy finish, for on reaching St. Anthony, 
after a seven-mile stage, the first person who greeted us was 
James M‘Kay, the leader of the party we had been expecting 
from Red River. His report was reassuring : he had found 
the country everywhere passable, the roads in good order, and 
the swamps tolerably free from water, though the rivers were - 

unusually swollen. There was nothing, in short, to stop our 
journey, and no reason to. anticipate serious difficulty or 
delay. ’ 

On hearing this, Sir George, who had full confidence in 
M‘Kay’s judgment, at once decided to go back ; there being 
now no object in joining Kitson, who, as matters had turned 
out, was probably by that time well on his way; so we 
gladly stepped into the waggon again, and returned to our, 

-old quarters at St. Paul. 

James M‘Kay accompanied us. His appearance greatly | 
interested me, both from his own personal advantages, and. 
because he was the first Red River man that I mae yet 
beheld. A Scotsman, though with Indian blood on the 

_mother’s side, he was born and bred in the Saskatchewan: 
country, but afterwards became a resident near Fort Garry, 
and entered the Company’s employ. Whether: as guide or 
hunter, he was universally reckoned one of their best men. - 


> 
CHAP. I. ‘ ST. PAUL, CROW-WING. 9 


Immensely broad-chested and muscular, though not tall, he 
weighed eighteen stone; yet in spite of his stoutness he was 
exceedingly hardy and active, and a wonderful horseman. 

‘His face—somewhat Assyrian in type—is very hand- 
some; short, delicate, aquiline nose; piercing dark grey . 
eyes ; long dark-brown hair, beard, and moustaches’; white, 
small, regular teeth ; skin- tanned to red bronze from ex- 
posure to weather. He was dressed in Red River style—a 

. blue cloth “capot” (hooded frock-coat) with brass buttons ; 
red-and-black flannel shirt, which served also for waistcoat ; 
black belt round the waist; buff leather moccasins on his 

“feet ; trowsers of brown and white striped home-made 
woollen stuff. 

_ I had never come across a wearer of moccasins before, 
and it amused me to watch this grand’ and massive man 

_pacing the hotel corridors with noiseless footfall, while 
excitable little Yankees in shiny boots creaked and stamped 
about like so many busy steam-engines. . 

At St. Anthony we also met Captain Blakiston, of -the-~ 

. Royal Artillery, who had arrived with M‘Kay, on his return 
from the Government Exploring Expedition, in which he had 
been associated with Captain Palliser. He, likewise, was for 
the most part dressed in Red River fashion, and bore very 

_ evident traces of two years’ severe work in the far west. 
There was another important addition to our party that 
evening—Dr. Rae, who had fortunately found himself able 
to carry out his intention of joining us. We were now to be 
fellow-travellers, as far at any rate as Fort Garry. 

Monday, May 16th.—Afier trying a number of horses, of . 
all sorts and kinds, belonging to various owners, I bought 
from the Messrs. Burbank a pair of large stout brown waggon- 
ponies, for which I paid about £70 in dollaiS.; also a very 


ae 


10 #” °NTAGARA, LACIINE, . CHAT. 


ry — . 

good young bay horse or the same description, but “Jarger, 
_ being 18} hands high, for font 40 euineas.. I succeeded in 
cetting ‘an excellent new hickory waggon, light and strong, 
for £17, and a useful second-hand set of waggon harness, also 
at a sufficiently reasonable price. With some searching | 
then discovered a saddle of the English shape, very badly 
made in every respect, but I was glad to buy it for £5, for it 
-—--=syasthe only one’to be heard of, Elsewhere there were only 
Spanish saddles, than which no-more detestable invention 

can be imagined.- The rider might-as jell attempt to sit 

* inside a pitelrfark. 

I was more fortunate in my next purchase, consisting of 

a pair of exceedingly handsome ponies, a little under 14 hands 

in height, which I bought for about £30 apiece. Both of them 
were Vermont bred, and having been regularly driven together 

by their former owner during long’ excursions in the forests, 
they had become great friends, and were never happy when 
parted from cach a s society. The slighter one, a quiet, 
thorotighbred-looking a eht bay, with very ‘small and peculiar 
ears,-I called Verinont, § m the place of his nativity ; the 
‘other, a dark-brown, with black points ‘and a white blaze on 

lus front face,—a noble little horse with most splendid action, 

as gentle as a lamb, but fyfl of fire and spirit, “I named 
Moxy gan, after the celebrated breed from which he came. The 
brown waggon-horses, it was settled, were to be thenceforth: 
known as Paul and Anthony, the young bay horse a8 Don. - 
May 17th,—Sir George, Hopkins, and J, made an expe- 

- dition to sce the Minnehaha Falls, which had become so 
celebrated through Longfellow’s beautiful poem. Our drive 
was pleasant in itself, but disappointing as regarded its main 
object, for the river—which bounds in one clear shoot over 

a limestone rock some 50 feet in height—is a very insigni- 


CHAP. T. _ ST. PAUL, CROW-WING. 11 


u 
ficant stream, although aut its fullest at the time we saw ifs, 


The scene is pretty, but no more ; it would have little interest os 


were it’ not associated with Hiawatha’s story. 
Ne 


MINNFHAHA FALLS. Y 


May 18th_—Off at last. We travelled in the same hired 
‘char-a-bane with canvas tilt, the “stage” in which we made [ 
our former fruitless journey to St. Anthony. Our road led up 
the course of the Mississippi, through flatuninteresting prairies, 
over whith we jolted for many a weary hour till we reached 
Saux Rapids, where we took up our night’s abode at the 
Hyperborean Hotel. The landlord, a Canadian with a Scot-. 
tish wife, was a very good-humoured obliging host; he and 
his exerted themselves for our comfort with much zeak and 
energy. , . ' 

After dinner I tried a well-bred, handsome horse, highly 


- of 


250 


12 | NIAGARA, LACHINE, ST, PAUL, CROW- WING. car. 1, 


praised by his owner, and spoken of as likely to.answer well 
for buffalo-running. He was fast enough, certainly, but both 
awkward and restive, so I did not buy him, though rather 
" advised to do so, rightly supposing that a half- broke animal 
" would-add too much to the difficulties of an. vpafamiliar sport. 
° May 19th-—The next day’s travelling, still, Fover level 
plains only partially settled, brought ‘us to Crow-wing, a 
village of no great size, where we took our final leave of the 
stage-waggon, as we descended from it at the door of Morri- . 
son’s Tin, Awaiting us there we found James M‘Kay, with 
everything “arranged and ready for-a start next morning at 
the earliest sigits of dawn. 


CHAPTER IL. 
CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. 


MAY 20th.—Our night was one of restlessness and broken 
slumbers, through the inroad of every hateful tormentor. 
Little mattered such annoyances!’ At daybreak we left all 
troubles behind us, mounted our good steeds, and made a fair, 
auspicious start for the wilderness, the forest, and the plains. 
What gladness swelled within my heart—oh! never shall I 
forget it—as I felt the gallant little Morgan bounding and 
dancing beneath me, scarce able to control himself for joy, 
while we passed tlirough the pleasant woods on that lovely 
summer niorning, when all nature seemed so fresh and beauti- ~ 
ful and sweet. Atlast; thought I, at Jast, the prisoner of 
civilisation is free! 

‘ Dr. Rae rode at my side o on well-bred handsome Vermont. 
Sir George, who was in but indifferent health, travelled by 
himself in a light Canadian cart, which was furnished with 
curtains and a canopy on poles. The Iroquois Toma drove 
Paul and Anthony in my waggon; Short, a Scotch half- 
breed, conducted the Red River cart, a stout two-wheeled 
\yehicle of the toughest quality though entirely made of 
wood, wheels, body, shafts, and ‘all, being fitted together with- 
outs single particle of iron, The other men rode’; and the 
spare ftgrses, of which M‘Kay had brought a considerable 
number, tan freely alongside and never attempted to stray 
from their campanions. " 


cary , 


l4 CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. ena. IL 


On leaving Crow-wing we crossed the Mississippi in a 
larse Hat baree, of the sort known as a “scow,” which took 


~ XN 
aver the horses and vehicles as well as ourselves and our 


bavgave. After this the road became a mere rough track. 
‘For some time, however, it ran through a pine forest, in 
qany parts of noticeable growth, and was tolerably sound 
and hard, though intersected by a few trifling swamps. 
About 12 o'clock we halted for breakfast—not a moment 
wou suon in any one’s opinion, for-we had been. about seven 
hours on horseback,—and did great justice to eggs and bacon, 
biscuits and butter, accompanied with the universal drink of 
the Company’s service—remarkably excellent tea. This mid- 
day halt is but seldom a long one; we were soon again on the 
ruad.- The swampy places grew more frequent and trouble- 
some, till at length, at “ Miry Creek,” we were obliged to stop 
and make a portage,—that is to say, to transfer all the 
bageage from the carts to the shoulders of the men, who 
carried it across the swamp, while the lightened vehicles were 
dragged through as could best be managed. I witnessed this 
aperation for the first time, aud was astonished at the strength 
and hardinessof our practised voyageurs. M'Kay in particular 
showed the most wonderful euergy. Up to his waist or chest 
in the clinging mud or the sluggish black water of the creek, 
now passing heavy packages across, now dragging reluctant 
«nimals through the mire, all came alike to him, and his 


cheerfulness never flagged. 


This portage delayed us more than an hour, Soon after- 
wanis we had to make anuther over Swan Creek, a swollen 
brook, bat as there was no mire we managed this easily by, 
mens OF an iudia-rubber canoe. By-that time it was nearly 


3 veluck, s¢ M-Kay decided to halt, and at once Jed us to an 


exeeHert camping place, where a grove of fine Scots firs 


CHAP. IL CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. 15 


stood in scattered groups upon an elevated sandy flat, near 
which flowed with calm but powerful sweep the broad and 
swollen stream of the Crow-wing Itiver* , 

The weary horses were set free, tents pitched, wood cut, 
fires lighted. Our simple supper was soon prepared and soon 
discussed, then came a few minutes devoted to conversation 
and the pipe or cigar, and then to bed. Our tents were of 
the sort generally known as “ boat-tents,” about six feet 
square inside, and six feet high to the ridge. Two upright 
\poles supported another, longitudinally set, over which the 
canvas passed, so that the whole looked like a small straight- 
sided cottage, with the entry at one end. About two feet 
from the ground the slope of the roof ceased, and canvas flaps 
went straight downwards till they reached the earth, when 
their ends were turned in and placed under an oil-cloth flooring 
which kept all compact and dry. 

Sir George and Hopkins occupied one of the tents, Dr. 
"Rae and I shared the other. We wrapped ourselves in our 
blankets, and my companion was soon asleep. For my own 
part, this first night under canvas was far from agreeable to 

* one so lately somewhat of an invalid. A keen frost struck 
upwards and downwards through the blankets, making sleep 
difficult, and troops of Whip-poor-wills and other nightbirds 
shrieked with a maddening persistency that made it nearly 
impossible. After many hours some broken slumber came at 
last, and, thanks to the pureness of the air, I rose up toler- 
ably fresh and ready for action when the summons awakened 
our silent camp at daybreak. 

May 21st—Though sunny all the day it was 5 exceedingly 
cold, an icy north wind encountering us as we went, and 


* «Phe Ojibwa name for this stream is Aug-aug-c-ie-guon, meaning Crow's 
Feather." —ScHooucnary, Ind. Tribes of Ua, States, vol. ii. 157. 


16 CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. onan TL 


chilling us to the very bone. In distance our march was 
much the same as that of the previous day—about five-and- 
thirty miles, but it was far less interesting,’ being almost ’ 
eutirely over an untimbered plain of poor quality, covered in 
many parts with an extensive growth ‘of brushwood. 

I tried Don for the morning march, but he was- so rough 
in his paces, that my right knee (tender since a balloon accident 
in 1848) began to be painful, and I resolved nevet to ride 
that horse again. After this he took his turn at the cart ; 
he proved too young and unseasoned, however, for much hard 
work, so I finally disposed of him at Fort Garry~~ 

Dr. Rae and M‘Kay walked forward with their guns 
before the whole party started, and, keeping well in front, 
they picked up some prairie fowls,* ducks, and plovers, which 


*.Common and widely diffused as the Prairie-Hen seems to be, some con- 
fusion apparently exists among naturalists in regard to it. Of all the Tetra- 
onide, as described by Dr. Richardson and Mr, Swainson in the Fauna 
Boreali-Americana, there is only one species (besides the Ruffed Grouse — 
Tetrao umbecllus) in the least answering to the Prairie-fowl, viz, Zetrav 
(centrocercus) phastanellus—The Sharp-tailed Grouse (length of male 20 inches), 
which I rather believe to be the bird in question, In the Zoological Appendix 
to Sir John Franklin’s Narrative, ann. 1823 (p. 680), by Mr. Sabine, there is 
also no detailed description of any other nearly corresponding species ; but 
under the heading Tetrao umbcllus—Rugrd Grouse, the author writes :-— This 
species is an inhabitant of wooded countries only, in which it differs from the 
Pinnated Grouse of America, Tetrao cupido, better known under the appella- 
tion of the Prairie Hen or Heath Hen.” Under the heading Yetrao phasia- 
nellus — Sharp-tailed Grousc, the same author states, that Linnaeus at first 
called that bird 7. phastanellus, but afterwards made it a variety of 7." 
urogallus ; ‘ahd that subsequent experience has proved that the first opinion 
was correct.” 

~JIn the Naturalist’s Library, edited by Sir William Jardine wok. i 
p. 130), two closely allied species are described besides the Ruffed Grouse, viz. 
— The Pinnated Grouse—Tetrao cupido (which is quoted as Linneus's desig- 
nation of it), and the Sharp-tailed Grouse—Tectrao phasiancllus, the adult male 
of which is described as being ‘‘as large as” the Ruffed Grouse, viz. about 


fa 


CHAR IR CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. 17 


we boiled with tice ‘at supper, to the great improvement of 
our fornier fare, 

We camped near Leaf: Lake, whose shores were the site 
of a “ city” which consisted of two wooden huts. 

The following day (Sunday, May 22d) was very warm and 
fine, and travelling became-altogether more agreeable, for 
the road now took us through a pretty and varied country 
abounding in woods and lakes. 

In the morning we came across two or three Ojibways, 
the first of whom was no favourable specimen,—a miserable “7 
object, half naked’ and quite drunk, a bloated, disgusting 
savage. These Indians seemed peaceable and harmless 


eighteen inches. Major Ross King, however (Zhe Sportsman and Naturalist 
in Canada, ann. 1866—p. 148), only seems to recognise one bird of the kind in 
addition to the Ruffed Grouse, viz. The Prairie Hen—Cupidonia cupido, and 
he describes the male as “‘ averaging nearly three pounds avoirdupois in weight, 
not far from that of an ordinary Cock Pheasant ” (about double the weight of 
‘an average Scottish Grouse), and as “ measuring about nineteen inches in 
length,” which approaches the length assigned by Dr. Richardson to the _ 
Tetrao phasianellus—viz. twenty inches. Mr. Hind, referring to the Prairie- 
fowl in the Roseau Lake district, not very far from Red River, designates 
them Tetrao cupido (Canadian Red River Exploring Expedition, vol. i, p. 160). 
Amidst this conflict of authorities it is hard to decide, and I can form no 
opinion as to whether or not the Sharp-tailed Grouse and the Pinnated Grouse 
are distinct. If, though distinct, they are closely-allied varieties, it is possible 
I may have shot specimens of both without observing the difference. I am 
disposed, however, to think that the birds we so constantly met with more — 
resembled in size the former than the latter. My men used to speak of them 
as ‘* Pheasants ;”’ and, all things considered, I incline to identify them with: 
Dr. Richardson's “ Tetrao phasianellus ,?-—“‘ Awkiscow—Cree Indians ; Phea- 
sant—Hudson’s Bay residents.” —(Faun. Bor. Am. vol. ii. p. 361). 
Otherwise, one is forced to the strange conclusion that one of the 
commonest birds in the Hudson's Bay Territories has been omitted frdm a 
book expressly relating to the zoology of that country,—a work prepared by 
several distinguished naturalists, among whom Dr. Richatdson, at any rate, 
was intimately acquainted with those northern parts of America, having been 
. engaged in both of Sir John Franklin’s overland expeditions. 
Cc 


4 


18 CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. ss cntar. 


enough, but we presently fell in “wit a very dangerous party 
of the same tribe. ; ‘ 

We were just entering a, fine level prairie, which stretched 
a good twelve miles to the front, when we noticed.a band of 
arined Indians posted on a mound that commanded the road. 
They evidently expected us, for one of them instantly ran to 
intercept Hopkins and M‘Kay, who were riding foremost, 
threw ,himnself in their way, and tried hard to stop them, 
loudly clamouring for presents. 

* Sir George called to us to go on. We pressed forward. 
At that moment the Indian made a spring, and clutched at 
M‘iKay’s rein ; but the latter very quickly got rid of him, 
seizing the fellow’s hand in such.a gripe that he danced 
with pain and astonishment, and went staggering to the other 
side of the track. , 

Another Indian snatched at the wheel of Sir George’s 
cart, but failed to keep his hold; and as,we went steadily 
onwards, the-villains thought better of it, and let us pursue 
our course, but before we had gone fifty yards they hed the 
insolence to fire a bullet over our heads; then thé whole 
band began to shout and make grossly insulting gestures. 
Such impertinence was hard to bear, and some of us felt 
inclined to turn back and try conclusions with them ; Sir 
George, however, begged us not to notice their insults, point- 
ing out that any injury received at our hands would only be 
revenged upon future travellers. He might have added that 
we should certainly have got the worst of it, the enemy being 
more numerous and twice as well armed. 

It was fortunate that we were a rather strong-looking 
party, for these- Indians were of an Ojibway band called 
“Les Pillageurs,” * notorious for their daring—raseality—As—— 


* “The name of The Pillagers, or Muk-un-dua-win-in-c-wug, pillage-men, 
*. 


"HAP, I CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. , 19 


recently as the foregoing year they had wantonly shot 
two horses belonging to-some Red River half-breeds who 
happened to be passing along that already much-frequented 
track. 

Later in the day we crossed Little Red River, and in 
course of the afternoon traversed another considerable prairie, 
covered all over with the long, withered herbage of the bye- 
gone season, Taking no heed of this store of inflammable 
‘stuff I carelessly threw away a match with Which I had been 
lighting my meerschaum ; in an instant the prairie was in a° 
blaze. The wind speedily bore the-.flames away from us, 
and ere long the conflagration raged far and wide. I never 
heard to what extent it spread, but for hours afterwards we- 
could see its lurid glow illuminating the darkness of the 
distant horizon. 

Morgan carried me beautifully the whole forty miles of 
the march, and came in as fresh as when he started. He 
was quiet and ‘gentle, spirited and handsome, perfect in all 
his paces ; a more charming pony it would be impossible 
to imagine, Wo 

‘A few early mosquitoes showed themselves, the pioneers 
of the coming legions—ill-omened sight! 

May 23d.—We started at 4 a.m., and rode till 9, passing 


was given to them by their fellow Ojibwas and whites, on account of their 
having taken away the goods of a trader about eighty years ago [about 1770}, 
at the mouth of a creek still known as. Pillage Creek, emptying into the 
Crow-Wing fiver. The band is also noted for their wildness, and as having 
on several later occasions acted to the letter of their name in their dealings 
with traders and missionaries, . . . . Of the Pillagers, when you ask 
them who were their most noted warriors and men, the answer is—‘ They all 
fought alike; not one of our fathers passed through life without seeing the 
shedding of “blood,? Sconooncnart, Report on the Indian Tribes of the 
United States, vol. ii., 153, 165. , 


Maat sh 4 


20 _ CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. © CHAP, II. 


for three hours through a wood of fine maples, ironwood, and 
brush, not unlike an English forest in appearance. While 
traversing its bounds the Red River cart upset, but it was 
raised again, without injury either to that stout vehicle, or to 
Don, who was in the shafts at the time.” ‘ 

After this we emerged on the banks of Lake Forty-four 
(so called from the date of the discovery of this route), a fine 
sheet of the clearest water, enlivened by the whiteness of a 
flock of swimming and wading pelicans. We had meant to 
halt for breakfast near the lake, but were completely put to 
rout by ¢louds of minute flies, actually.dense enough to 
choke up the horses’ nostrils, so we rode on for-some miles 
farther, to the next convenient halting-place. 

Here mischance continued to follow us; for our break- 
fast fire, being carelessly lighted, began to spread along the 
grass, and in a few minutes the wind, taking a sudden turn, 
blew all the smoke and sparks into our faces, obliging us 
to make a rapid retreat into the part already consumed. 
The grass being short and: crisp on, the barren eminence 
where we had posted ourselves, the line of flame never rose 
much above a foot from the ground, yet we had hard work to 
beat it out, and could scarcely force or persuade the horses to 
cross that really insignificant obstacle. 

We now began to ascend to a higher level, and coming 
at length to the top of an ascent, a most glorious landscape - 
opened full upon our view. Far as the eye could reach 
swept one enormous plain, its vast extent diversified by the 
winding courses of the Red River and the Shayenne, and of 
many a smaller stream, whose meanderings could be traced 
i’ the trees that clung alorig their sides in a distinct though. 
narrow border. . ° 

The day had become intensely hot,. it was difficult to 


. i 
a 


te 


cHAY, U. ; cROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. 21 


breathe, one felt almost ready to faint. Thunder was pealing 
and lightning flashing in different parts of the sky, but far 
distant from us. Suddenly a 
phenomenon displayed itself 
on the south-west horizon—a 
waterspout of gigantic size and 
singular appearance. Its thin 
and lofty stem was surmounted 
by a far-spreading cloud of 
inky blackness ; at the base of the colimn torrents dashed 
upon the earth, rebounding in fountain-like masses of silvery .. 
spray. This grand and uncommon spectacle continued for a 
quarter of an hour, then it began to dissolve away, and Slowly 
faded into nothingness. ; 
May 24th.— An amusing though unpleasant incident 
happened in the night. .. ‘Duncan, who was but a novice in 
the art of encamping, had thoughtlessly set the flaps of my 
tent over the oil-cloth floor instead of under it, as he should 
have done,—a mistake which unluckily passed unobserved, for 
it was hardly perceptible when the blankets were laid down. 
Towards midnight I- suddenly awoke, and found myself in 
a pool of water. A violent thunderstorm was raging, rain 
beating furiously.on the canvas, and entering beneath the 
unfastened flaps; whole floods streaming in and flowing round 
my back and shoulders. The-darkness was intense. I 
managed to light a candle, and gazing on the cheerless scene 
discovered that my own side of the tent was completely 
inundated ; it lay low, and the oil-cloth, instead of running 
the water off, had made itself into a reservoir for my benefit. 
The other side was-better situated, being on higher ground, 
and there [ beheld my companion, Dr. Rae, sound asleep, as 
‘yet undisturbed by the tide, which only encroached upon his 


WATERSPOUT, 


a 
. 


© 


22 CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. CHAP. 1. 


feet and ankles. He slept quietly on, till in an hour or two 
the gradually rising water awoke him. 

Little could be done until daylight, but I improved matters 
by turning my india-rubber bath bottom upwards, with a 
pillow on the top of it, so as to form an island ; on which I 
seated myself, after drawing a waterproof over my soaking 
shirt, and passed away the time in writing up my journal. 

By 6 o’clock the rain had ceased. I escaped from the 
chilly tent, and, much to my satisfaction, found M‘Kay -in 
the act of kindling a fire, on a dry open piece of ground a 
few yards distant. | Having extemporised a hut of branches 
covered with an oil-skin, he had passed a tolerable night; 
the men, too, had been pretty well sheltered beneath the 
carts and waggon, and Sir George and Hopkins had slept 
very comfortably in their well-pitched tent. 

May 25th.—Owing to rain and mist we had marched but 
five miles on the previous day, M‘Kay disliking to travel in 
wet weather, on account of the injury that damp occasions to 
soft leather harness. To make up, we rode twenty miles, 
without a halt, that bitterly cold, raw, east-windy morning, 


“only stopping when we reached the flooded stream of the 
Rice River. 


After breakfast we drove the horses across, while M ‘Kay ~ 


built an ingenious scow by stretching our largest oil-skixt over 
the wheels of the cart. These ironless wheels have a great 
outward set, so that when ‘taken off and laid on their naves 
the level of the tires rests a foot or more above that of the 
ground. Two of them being placed side by side on the oil- 
cloth, were firmly tied together ; four poles were then lashed 
_to each other so as to form an oblong, and this being fastened 


upon the wheels, and the oil-skin beneath (a aA) drawn up 
and attached to it, a'strong and buoyant spans the result, 


—_—— 


CHAP, 11, CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. | 23 


the wheels being at once framework and platform, while the 


- poles made a steady gun- 


wale for the paddles to 
work on—‘The luggage 
and thevehicles were safely 
and speedily ferried over, 
M‘Kay, as usual, wading 
about waist-deep, active 
and ready beyond imagina- 
tion, . . . . After this 


-we had a most weary ride CART- HEEL SCOW. 


over @ long plain, recently 
burned and quite black, and so soft from the heavy rains that 


_ the horses went fetlock-deep at every step, sometimes sinking 


to the very hocks. Every brook was a river, every swamp 
alake, the road a swamp. A cold steam rose from the soaked 
earth, our spirits’ were damped, the jaded horses plodded 
heavily on. . . . . The journey seemed endless, for we 
could not find a good camping-place, but at length we settled 
down near a stream between Rice and Sand-hill Rivers.’ 

} Having. borrowed a gun, I went forward while a portage 


“vas making over a small but deep little river, and shot a few 


ducks, as well as a prairie-fowl. I felt somewhat pleased in 
also shooting two bitterns, but my friends objected to them 
for supper, on account of their frog-devouring propensities. 
Remembering a highly-approved dish in the refreshment-room 
at Toronto, it-struck me that if we ate frogs ourselves we need 
not object to birds that did no worse. The bitterns, however, 
were vetoed on this occasion. I often ate them afterwards, 
and agree with our forefathers in thinking them excellent food. 

May 26th——After breakfasting on the pretty banks of 
the Sand-hill River, at a place where sandy elevations were 


2+. CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY... CHAP, 1. 


covered with scattered trees, we forded its shallow stream 
and passed the baggage across in M‘Kay’s oil-skin scow. 

From this point the track improved, for it quitted the 
low moist plains, and ran along at a higher level on a dry and 
wholesome prairie. 

In the afternoon we observed a small black bear quest- 
ing about in the distance, whereupon M‘Kay, with his won= 
derful art of making all horses go, immediately coaxed a 
gallop out of the wretched lame pony he was riding, and 
“ran” the bear, as the phrase is. A, black pointer, named 
Blucher, joined zealously in the chase, turning the beast 
several times and worrying at his hind legs ; the coward, 
however, showed no signs of fight, though twice as big as his 
enemy, and M‘Kay presently came up and shot him through 
the heart. 

- This - two-year-old bear was miserably thin and ragged. 
He seemed to have been in straits for food, for there was 
“nothing in his stomach more nourishing than ants, many of 
them alive and active ; he had positively swallowed the whole 
nest—moss, earth, insects, and all. ° We varied our supper 
with bear-steaks that night. I thought \them particularly 
nasty,—lean, coarse, and rank-smelling ;. perhaps, “however, 
this was attributable to the animal’s want of \condition, for 

fat bear is spoken of as orfe of the best of things.” ‘ 


All night long the wolves made doleful music in the * 


wood on the other side of Red Lake River. This deep wide 
stream rolled on in heavy flood a few yards below the willows 
that sheltered our tents, and as I watched its swift and turbid 
current, I could not but wish that everything were safe across. 

May 27th.—The crossing of the Red Lake River occupied 
us till 12 o’clock, M‘Kay and Toma began by launching 
the india-rubber canoe and leading one of the horses over ;, 


. f 
_ OMAP, I. CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. _ 25 


_ the rest took the water after a little pushing and driving, and 
all got safely to the other side. The. baggage was then fer- 
ried. across in an oil-skin scow, which we towed backwards 
and forwards by means of two ropes. | 
Then came a hard march of twenty-six miles without a 
halt, mostly. along’ a high gravelly bank of singular character, 
with swamps on either hand. Here, to our surprise, we beheld 
a tradesmanlike man walking towards us all alone. He proved 


to be an American pedlar, who, with true Yankee independ 


ence, Was returning companionless on foot after the disposal 
-of all his cargo at Fort Garry. Excepting the knife in his 
pocket he was without a weapon, and there was but little in 
the small provision-bag he carried on his back. We won- 
dered how he would contrive to pass the Red Lake River, 
which-is the worst difficulty in the whole 428 miles of the 
journey to Crow-wing. I believe that he waited till another 
party came up, and crossed with their assistance. 

For the first time the mosquitoes appeared in force. Not 
expecting them, I had no gloves with me, and, in spite of 
constant watchfulness; my hands were excessively bitten, and ” 
so empoisoned that they swelled up: and grew very pain- 
fal, such - feverishness succeeding as to’ prevent me from 
sleeping for the whole of the following night. I never again 
‘suffered so much in this way, for the blood gets by degrees 
accustomed to the venom of the bites,—there is less inflam- 
mation afterwards, though quite as much annoyance at the 
moment. 

May.-28th-—We breakfasted early this ‘morning, after 
scowing across Snake-hill River, so I borrowed a gun and went 
forward in hopes of picking up some game, In this I was 
disappointed, and had more than enough of deep wading 
through flooded creeks ; but the beauty and freshness of the 


iN 


4 
ere ee r 


26 CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. CHAP, Ii, 


morning, and the exquisite singing of thousands of little 
birds in the bushes and poplar groves, amply made up to me 
for all. My bag, however, was not quite an empty one, for 
while waiting at Pine River for the arrival of the carts, I 
stalked and shot some pigeons that had settled among the 
higher trees up and down the course of the stream. 

They were exceedingly pretty birds, rather larger than 
- turtle-doves, bluish in colour, and chiefly differing from the 
common pigeon in the pheasant-like length of their pointed 
tails. We often heard their peevish scream, but, from their 
wildness, could not succeed in getting many of-them.* 

Towards afternoon we came to a miserable country, swamp 
following swamp, and at length we got entangled in one of 

such depth, that poor Don, who was ee the cart through 
never be able to movehim. 

‘The frogs, as usual, never ceased their chirping and 
croaking uproar ; cranes were very numerous, uttering con- 
tinually their doleful, throat-gargling cry, a sound only 
surpassed in wretchedness by the shrieks of the ungreased 
cart-wheels, which moaned and screamed like a discontented 
panther,’ 

Sunday, May 29th.—The horses strayed, and delayed us 
more than half-an-hour, but we made our start at 5 AM, and 
_ were as far as the first of the Deux Rivieres by our usual 
dinner-time. Previously to this we had been traversing a 
ich but bare and level prairie of many miles’ extent.— It is 
strange to find oneself on an apparently flat disc of grass, 
nothing but grass meeting the plain horizon-line all around. 
One feels as if crawling about in view of high Heaven on a 


* Columba (Ectopistes) Migratoria, Passenger Pigeon. Mimewuck— Cree 
Indians.—RicHarpson, Faun. Bor.-Am., vol. ii. p. 368. 


* 


CHAP, Il CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. 27 


circular table‘punched out from the world and stuck on a 
spike.’ 

‘A lovely sunny day, and not too hot. . . . We crossed 
the river without accident, thanks to M‘Kay’s skill and activity, 
and camped on the banks of the second of the Deux Rivieres. 

May 30th-——There was a break in our journey through the 
wilderness when early that afternoon we arrived at Pembina, 
near\the boundary of the British territories, ‘a small and 
straggling place, not worthy to be called a village, and 
established ourselves at the Company’s fort, then under charge 
of Mr.,M‘Intosh. By Sir George’s directions all sorts of good 
things were specially provided for our dinner. A calf was 

“killed for the occasion, Gold-Eye fish were procured,—in 
short, we were treated to a most excellent meal, doubly 
welcome to us after the rough fare of the preceding week ; 
which had been little but salt pork, with the addition of such 
pigeons, curlews, ducks, and plovers, as we had managed to 
pick up by the way. ° 

Our quiet was too soon interrupted by the uproar of a 
large band of Saulteaux,* who came and fired salutes close 
by in honour of the Governor's arrival This meant the usual 
thing—presents; but Sir George gave them little encourage- 
ment, probably not choosing to countenance irregular demands 
from natives in trade relations with the Company, especially 
as he was travelling for the first time by this rather recently 
developed Minnesota route. . 


* Or Salteurs, or Sotoos,—one of the branches of the Ojibway tribe, so 
named from their residence having been near the Sault St. Marie. — 
FRANKLIN, Journey to the Polur Sea, in the Years 1819-22, p. 68. Mr. Kane 
thus writes on the subject:—* The Saulteaux are a band of the great Ojibbeway 
nation, both words signifying ‘the Jumpers,’ and I derive the namo from 
their expertness in leaping their canoes over the numerous rapids which occur 
in the rivers of their vicinity.”—- Wanderings of an Artist, p. 82. 


rN 


28 _ CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. “OWAP, 1h 


I was disappointed in these Indians. They too much re- 
sembled commonplace Europeans, southerners in aspect, 
northerners in the forms and materials of their clothing— by ° 
no means fine-looking men, but picturesque with their green 
or scarlet blankets, and their long, streaming, ‘coal-black hair’ 

May 31st—Qur road was mostly over vast rich plains, and 
the only incident of the day was the passage of the Vieux 
Marais, a horribly swampy creek, which from its depth offered 
a serious obstacle, although only afew yards wide. It was 
necessary to take the trouble of unharnessing, and pushing 
or hauling the carts across, after a previous portage of the 
baggage. The men carried us all over. M‘Kay took Sir 
George, but I was quite as well placed on Toma’s powerful 
back, though even he had enough to do in wading this deep 
and treacherous morass. ; 

We were furnished with a strange lot of horses to-day, 


‘which had been taken from the Company's Pembina 


establishment to relieve our own jaded animals. Hopkins 
rode a showy, skew-bald, Roman-nosed pony, a buffalo- 
runner of some repute, but whose chief accomplishment 
seemed to consist in stumbling, which he climaxed by a 
sudden fall on his head. ; ; 

My steed was much more remarkable, being a true 
specimen Of the'“ woolly” horse, his soft dun hair covering 
him in close-curls like the fleece of a Leicester sheep. He 
had been brought from the Columbia River country, where a 
breed of that kind is said to exist. . 

__ Sune 1st—We. had heavy rain and.thunder: at ~aight; but—— 
kept all dry in our tents, with’ one trifling exception. It 
cleared up for a few minutes betw een 4 and 5 a.m, so we set 
out on our march; rain, however, came on again, and lasted 
nearly four hours, ; 


CHAP, I. CROW-WING TO FORT GARRY. 29 


We breakfasted at the house of a settler named D . 
who lived with his family in great apparent comfort in that 
small log cottage, and farmed on a moderate scale, owning 


_ sixty head of cattle, and cultivating a few acres of land. 


After taking leave of Mr. D we crossed the Red 
River in a ferry-boat, and riding forward at a good pace, in 
two hours or so we found ourselves opposite Fort Garry. 

Placing ourselves in the ferry-boat for the second time 
that day, we speedily arrived at the other side; then, 
having remounted our steeds—mine was Morgan once more 
—we dashed at full gallop up to the Fort, amidst the firing 
of cannon and the cheers of a welcoming crowd. 


CHAPTER III. 
FORT GARRY. 


FORT GARRY, as we approached it, seemed to mea very 
considerable place. It was then, as I believe it is now,a 
great parallelogram of lofty stone walls with circular bastion 
towers, within which compass stood rows of storehouses in 
line with the sides, while, rectangularly to these, ranges of 
more important buildings occupied the central space, facing 
this way and that towards the opposite ends of the oblong. 

On entering the enclosure we rode up to the principal 
house, where we“were received by Dr. Bunn, the medical 
resident at the Fort; we had been previously met near the 
ferry by Mr. Fortescue, the second in charge, as representa- 
tive of his chief, Mr. Mactavish, who was then temporarily 
absent; and very comfortable rooms were prepared for us 
in the large and spacious mansion which for a while was s to 
form our home, 

‘As two o'clock struck we sat down to an excellent dinner, 
at which, besides the gentlemen already mentioned, our party 
comprised three of the Company’s clerks—Mr. Bridgeman, Mr. 
Watson, and_ “Mr. _Kennedy ; also another. traveller from=the 
old country, Mr. Boyd, an English gentleman, who was rest- 
ing here for a few days on his return journey, after a length- 
ened visit to the great cainp of the half-breeds during the 
continuance of their winter buffalo-hunt. 


\ 


CHAP, IIT, a FORT GARRY. - 31 


It was a large .party,—a pleasant one I am sure, we all 
found it, and wished for no change in its number; unfor- 
tunately, however, it soon had to suffer a serious diminu- 
tion, for, a few days after our arrival, Sir George’s official 
duties called him away to Norway House, at the northern 


extremity of Lake Winnipeg, there to preside at the general 


meeting of the Company’s chief officers,—an assemblage annu- 
ally held to arrange the business for each ensuing year. 
Before his departure he occupied much of his time in for- 
warding my intended expedition, heartily interesting himself 
in all its details, and giving me invaluable assistance and 
advice ; among other benefits, he was good enough to leave 
with me his own canoe-man, Toma, one of the ‘trustiest and 
best of fellows. . 

I felt melancholy when the hour of leave-taking arrived ; 
when farewells had to be exchanged with my much-valued 
friends Sir George and Mr. Hopkins. “Our acquaintance 
had been but—brief,.as dates might limit it, but. amidst, 
such journeyings as.we had shared in, a week does more for 
intimacy than months might do elsewhere. To me their 
companionship had been all that was kindly and agreeable, 
and mine, I trust, had to some extent been the same to them.* 

It took me a full fortnight to complete my preparations, 
notwithstanding the great help I received from Dr. Rae and 
Mr. Mactavish—I might indeed say, from every member of 
the Company’s establishment, for all vied with one another in 


* Little did I think that J looked on one of these friends for the last time, 
as westood at the gate and cordially pressed hands together. But so it was 
to be.. Not much more than a year had elapsed, when a very kind letter from 
Mr. Hopkins brought me the sorrowful news of Sir George Simpson’s death. 
He died in September 1860, after an illness of but five days’ duration, Thus 
was taken from us a true, warm-hearted friend, an able, energetic man ; thus 
was ended a most useful, active, and distinguished career. 


lg 


iN 


39 FORT GARRY, ‘ “Gita. 1. 


kind offices. There were men to engage, horses and carts to 
buy, stores of every kind to lay in,—a thousand things, in 
short, to do, which waste time more than any one could fancy 
who has not gone through the same experience. 

Twas impatient to set off, for summer in this land is a 
very fleeting season ; but, putting that aside, the days slipped 
pleasantly by: The Protestant Bishop of Rupert's Land’ 
(then Bishop Anderson), and Bishop Taché of the Romay, 
Catholic see of St. Boniface, were both good enough to call 
on me, and part of my time was passed in returning their 
visits and those of some of the other principal residents. 

The Red River: Settlement at that time consisted of a 
series of small farms and holdings, more or less thickly placed 
along the two. banks of the river from which it derives its 
name, At Fott Garry, where there were houses enough to 
form a sort of scattered town, the population was sharply 
divided by the river into. two distinct seclns, the Scotch 
and English settlers and their half-breeds occupying the 
western bank, while the French Canadians, whether pure or 
half-breed, occupied the right or eastern bank. 

On Monday the 6th, a very agreeable hour was passed by 
Dr. Rae and myself in visiting the Roman Catholic nunnery, 
- following an introduction to the Lady Superior afforded us by 

Bishop Taché’s kindness. It was chiefly an educational estab- 
lishment, managed by the nuns, who, I believe, were Sisters 
of Charity. They wore am extremely quaint and pretty dress. 
‘The close-fitting gown was of fawn-coloured cotton, with 
. sleeves square and open at the, wrist. Over the gown was a 
dark blue cotton petticoat, with small white spots, which, 
reaching only to within six inches from the ground, showed 
a narrow strip of fawn colour beneath. A heavy kerchief of 
black material covered the shoulders, and was crossed over 


i 


CHAP, III. FORT GARRY. 33 


the bosom ; a black poke-bonnet, above a plain white cap, 
completed the costume. A gilt crucifix hung from a girdle 
round the waist. Moccasins were worn insiead of shoes, 
according to the universal custom of the country, to which 
even the bishops conformed. These excellent nuns educated 
about forty children, mostly from among the French popula- 
tion. We had the pleasure of seeing a few of the pupils, 
whom Sister C very obligingly sent for, asking them to 
give us some specimens of their progress in music. Two 
nice-looking dark girls of fourteen first came in, and played 
several pieces on a pianotforte, —which, I cdnfessy it surprised 
me to see in this remote and inaccessible land ; then two- 
pretty little fair-haired children took their place, and, like 
the others, played in a pleasing and very creditable maniier. 
The institution was universally spoken of as most useful 
and popular, and as being in all respects remarkably well 
conducted. : 

Fort Garry was amply provided with churches; -for besides 
the two greater edifices known as the cathedrals, there was a 
large place of worship for the Presbyterians, who formed a 
* numerous and important body. I used in general to attend 
service at the Protestant Cathedral, where the Bishop himself 
officiated. Its interior was of extreme plainness; but one 
thinks little of that where all is simple and without pretence. 
Though the Presbyterian psalms and hymns were not in use, 
it was easy, to see that the Scottish race prevailed in the con- 
gregation,—the tunes and the manner of singing so forcibly 
recalling the sober, deliberate fashion of my own country, 
that I could’ scarcely believe myself thousands of miles away 
in the innermost heart of America. 

On the Assiniboine, a mile or two off, there is another 
Episcopalian settlement, named St. James’s. ‘I walked there 

a . D a7 


34 FORT GARRY. CHAP. III. 


one afternoon with Dr. Rae, and called on the Rev. Mr. 
Taylor, the incumbent, who showed us the church,—a 
pretty though simple building, the interior ornamented with 
texts and other designs, all painted by himself,—then hos- 
pitably invited ‘us to tea, In the parsonage drawing-room our 
attention was called to a picture of the Queen (a formerly 
well-known portrait from the Illustrated London News), 
which had been framed and conspicuously hung on the wall. 
It appeared that Indians often came expressly to see it, having 
strong feelings of loyalty to the sovereign; one old chief 
especially, a recent visitor there, had insisted on being 
allowed to kiss her Majesty’s portrait in token of his loving 
homage. 

Thursday, the 10th of June, was a notable day at Fort 
Garry. The first steamer that had yet navigated the Red 
River made-her appearance that morning, bringing two or 
three passengers from Minnesota. “Ans Northup” was the 
name of this small, shabby, stern-wheel boat, mean and insig- 
nificant in itself, but important as the harbinger of new 
developments of what Americans are pleased to call civilisa- 
tion. 

Crowds of Indians stood silently on the shore, watching 
the arrival of this strange portentous object. Little thought 
they how ominous a sight it was for them, fraught with pre- 
sages of ruin for all their wandering race! I know not 
whether these natives were Crees or Ojibways. They were - 
an ugly, hard-featured set. One woman only had some good 
looks, and these chiefly consisted in the marvellous whiteness 
and regularity of her teeth. Like many of the others she 
carried a child on her back carefully wrapped up in the folds of 
her thick blanket, and looking warm and comfortable in its 
nest. A few Cree families had made their smal] encampment 


FORT GARRY. 35 


CHAP. IL. 


on the prairie outside, near the Fort ; they were dirty, gipsy- 
like people, neither handsome, interesting, nor. picturesque. 
I observed one of the little boys driving his father’s horses 
home by shooting blunt arrows at them with all the force of 
a by no means despicable bow. From his very childhood the 
Indian learns inhumanity to animals, 

By the 14th all my preparations were complete. I was 
fortunate in securing the services of a thoroughly competent 
guide—that is to say, head man—in John M‘Kay, a younger 
brother of our energetic leader from Crow-wing. Under 
him were. four men belonging to his own district-— Morrison 
M‘Beath and Donald Matheson, of unmixed Sutherlandshire 

_descent ; George Kline,* of the French-Canadian race; and” 
James Short, whom I have ‘already spoken of—all of them 
picked men, perfectly up to their work, excellent fellows 
in eyery possible respect. Besides this Red River party, 
there was Duncan Robertson, who came with me from Scot- 
land; also Sir George’s canoe-man, Thomas Ariwakenha, 
the Iroquois, commonly known as Toma, whose duties con- 
sisted in driving the waggon, cooking my meals, and, along 
with Duncan, acting as my special attendant. ; 

Under charge of this efficient brigade there was gathered 
together a very considerable amount of property. of every sort 
and kind—horses and vehicles, weapons, provisions, and 
stores :—three new two-wheel carts, and the four-wheel wag- _ 
gon already mentioned, all filled to the brim-with various 
sorts of baggage ; my own canvas tent (the same one, I had 
used before), a large bell-tent for the men, oil-cloth sqyares, 
blankets, clothes and other personal goods ; bales of tea and 


: * . 
* The name is sometimes spelt Klyne or Cline; the spelling being varied 


even in the Company's account books, In pronunciation the 7 is sounded as 


¥, not as 6. 


6 


36 ; ° FORT GARRY. CHAP. II. 


sugar, sacks of flour and rice ; biscuits, jam, and eggs; and 
dried tongues in plenty to keep us in food tall we got fresh 
, meat in.the buffalo country ; many. pounds of the Company’s 
excellent flat “plug” tobacco for myself and my men ; an 
immense 90 Jb. roll of the rather coarser twist, for the 
especial benefit of the Indian 

Then we had a great snapty of goods of another degerip- . 
tion,—such as a large copper box of rifle powder, kegs of | com- ” 
mon powder, bullets, shot, and caps ; a variety of weapons ; 
axes, hammers, saws, a canteen, a portable table, and a ‘camp- 
stool, cooking utensils, etc. ; in short, we were provided, with 
more than every requisite for the plains, besides extra supplies 
to furnish the customary presents to any Indian parties’ we 
might chance to meet. ; ; 

There was one. deficiency, according to some people’s 
notions : I took no wine or spirits with me, nor allowed any 
to be taken, except a few bottles of rum. But little use was 
made even of this, and I afterwards left“the greater part of 
it at Fort Carlton. - What troubles and difficulties this saved 
me from I can only guess—from a great many, no doubt. 
We ought, however, to have had a small store of brandy for 
medicinal purposes. Indeed, I rather felt the Warit-of.stimu... 
lants when exhausted by hard work in the mountains. 

To draw the waggon there were four horses —my former 
purchases, Paul and Anthony, and two white horses of much the 
same size as these, the one called Lane and the other Wawb&, 
which, in Cree, means “white.” For the carts there were 
seven smaller beasts, the biggest of them scarcely more than’ 
a pony. Their names were as follows: :—Deserter, Nez-Blane; 
Gris, Mouldy, Spot, Bleu, and Little Black—unintere ing 
animals all, that cost on an’ average ahout £13 apiece. As 
' this list may indicate, the half-breeds generally name their 


+ 


omar. me “FORT GARRY. 37 


. horse according to colour or marking or other peculiarity, but 
‘sometimes after a former owner (¢g. Lane); sometimes, also, 

‘ though more rarely, after a circumstance or a place, or occa- 
sionally in an altogether unmeaning way. 

Then there were two buffalo-runners—a_ silver-tailed 
white pony, afterwards known as Wawpdoss (the Rabbit), a 
name suggested by his remarkable countenance ; and “Great 
Black,” a large, well-bred horse,—which, with thé last-men- 
tioned, I bought, from James M‘Kay,—reputed the fastest 
runner in the settlement, but too unmanageable to be gene- 
rally useful. Last, but best, came my favourite riding-ponies, 
Morgan and his companion Vermont. 

My guns and saddle had not arrived at St. Paul before 
our departure from that place ; so, by Sir George’s directions, 
John M‘Kay and another man had waited there to receive 
them and immediately bring them on. The things soon came 
to hand, upon which M‘Kay made rapid work, and reached 
Fort Garry just four days later than we did. It was with 
anxiety that I opened the gun-cases, but, excepting a few 
trifling rust spots, my precious weapons had taken no harm, 
after all the risks of damage they had run since I parted from 
them at the New York Custom-House. 

; As I afterwards discovered, half the number would have 
"served my purpose, for, having little means ‘to judge what 
was really needful, I had been erring far too zealously on 
what seemed the safer side. 


OF all the armament, I held in infinite preference a pair. 


of two-grooved double-barrelled rifles, by Purdey. A better 
pair no maker could possibly turn out.. They hayg: been 
immensely used, and in pretty trying service ‘sometifnes; but 
to this day they remain as good as when I~ first handled . 
them some ecightecri or nineteen years ago. They carry a 


’ 


& 


38 FORT GARRY. CHAP. IT, 


medium-sized, but _very deadly, conical ball. My other riffe , 
was one of large bore; by Dickson in Edinburgh ; a good one, 
I believe, but, on account of its weight, I- hardly. ever used it, 
not finding bullets of great size to be required. I had also a 
pair of excellent, Purdey shot-guns, of No. 12 gauge, which, 
at close quarters, could throw round bullets most effectively... 
Besides these, I took a five-chambered revolving rifle, and a 
pistol of the same description, of the Colt manufacture. The 
latter [ never used ; the former shot well, but I disliked it 
for reasons afterwards mentioned. These were the only 
breech-loaders I possessed, that sort of weapon being little 
employed for sporting purposes until a year or two afterwards. 
My men’ had various guns and rifles of their own ; none 
were worth much, except a highly-serviceable double-barrelled 
gun belonging to M‘Kay, of the best possible pattern for 
general use in that country. It was as thick in the metal as 
a rifle, and carried a bullet accurately to more than a hundred 
yards, and as its bore was of the size (28) universal in the 
Company’s trade, supplies of ball could be got anywhere and 


. almost from any person. Small as these bullets are—for, 


being round, they had none of the expansion of a conical 
ball, especially a flanged one such as that shot by my rifles, | 
which were really but little different in the gauge—they are . 
large enough, if well directed, to kill any beast in America; — 
stores of them, moreover, can be carried in little bulk——an'~ 
inestimable advantage for the ordinary hunter. 

This handy and neatly-finished gun, which was made in 
London at.a trifling cost (£12 if I rightly remember], could 
also throw shot with a power that I have never seen equalled. 
Good as my Purdey smooth-bores were, M‘Kay used to kill 


ducks at distances fairly beyond my range. 


During the march I generally carried a rifle resting on a 


FORT GARRY. | 39 


CHAP. Hi 


rolled-up waterproof strapped to my saddle-bow, soon learning 
to poise it so that it almost steadied itself; and M Kay in- 

ariably carried -his gun, balancing it in a similar manner 
between his own body and the high front-peak-of his narrow 
Spanish saddle. My men also kept their weapons within 
reach, several guns and ‘yifles always lying loaded in the 
carts, ready in case of an emergency ; and all of the party 
were furnished with more or less formidable knives, some 
eveh with good-sized military swords that had once formed 
part of tle equipment of a Riflé Corps. ..We were, in short, a 
strongly-armed and sufficiently numerous company, able to 
bid defiance to any such small Indiaw hand as that of the 


Pillagers of Lake Otter-tail. 


x 

a. 

a . 

aoe 
ar a) 


RED RIVER FIRE-BAG. 


3 Yen 
VAN CHAPTER IV. 
a) ‘Tire 


FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE. 


JUNE 15th.—After a fortnight’s preparation and delays, 
my arrangements were at length completed, and by 5 o'clock 
that afternoon the expedition was fairly under weigh and pro- 
ceeding steadily forward on its western course. 

Our first march was not a long one; we had not meant it 
to be so ; we had been only desirous to emerge from the neigh- 
bourhood of the Fort, so as to gather all into due place and 
order, and to shake off"that spirit of lingering whose infiu- 
ences impede the travellerswhen within the sphere of settle- 
.. ments. ’ ats 

We were. now encamped at ‘Sturgeon, Creek, some few 
miles on our-journey? * The, weather was fine, everything 
worked smoothly, all promised: well. for the morrow. 

June 16th.— We halted a few hours at White Horse 
Plains, where I.dined at the Fort with Mr. Lane; the gentle- 
man in charge of that station. The whole place was swarm- _ 
ing with half-breed hunters and their families, who, with in- 
numerable carts and horses, were gathering there preparatory 
to their start for the prairies on their great annual summer 
buffalo hunt. 

I was glad to escape from this scene of noise and con- 
fusion, when we were at length enabled to resume our march ; 
but by that time it had grown late, so we only went some 


a ; 
CHAP. IV. FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE, 41 


seven or eight miles farther, and halted in a prairie, making 
our camp beside a grove of young willows. 

June 17th—At ‘dawn of day Iwas awakened by a most 
delicious concert of birds singibe in the bushes round my 
tent. The air was pure and fresh, the low rays of the sun 
gleamed on the dewy herbage, all nature was full of cheer- 
fulness, and the pretty songsters tuned their voices to an 
encouraging strain. 

As they fluttered around me, they seemed to beckon me 
forward, and their notes took the form of words, erying with 
endless reiteration — This-is-the-pdth ; Ob-this-is-the-way ! 
Sometimes one with a very deep voice would sing all alone 
—This-is-the-pith ; then a hundred voices would answer 
him rapturously in the shrillest’ treble, with—Oh-th{s-is-the- 
way ; and then all would unite together and chorus forth their 
little ditty again and again. , 

We were off by 5 o'clock this morning, but our progress 
was_not very great, interruptions and delays occurring at 
every turn, chiefly on horse-dealing business, which is always 
a tedious affair. I.added two capital animals to my lot— 
“Blond,” otherwise “M‘Gillis,” a handsome chestnut with 
long wavy mane and tail,—sleek and immensely fat, which is 
here counted the greatest of merits, as bespeaking plenteous 
winter keep and corresponding stores of substance for future 
wear and tear; and “La Framboise,” a Saskatchewan-bred 
brown, too lean, but strong and hardy-looking ; both of 
them were very serviceable cart-horses, fit enough even for 
the waggon. . 

I thought “Blond” by no means a dear bargain at £18 ; 
for “La Framboise” I gave to the hunter from whom his 
name was derived £15, likewise also little Black, who was 
much too weak for harness and too small for the saddle. 


S 


42 FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE. CHAP. IV. 


Sunday, June 19th—After a talk with M‘Kay, I settled 
to have a complete halt on Sundays. [I made this rule from 
no strict Sabbatarian reasons, but from a belief that the 
special weekly holiday would be good for man and beast; a. 
reminder of home ties for the former, and a useful rest for 
both. The Scottish settlers seldom shoot on Sundays, but 
their travelling goes on without difference, so my rule was 
rather a novelty. These breaks in the journey answered well 
enough in summer, but had to be given up when cold weather 
set in. Delay then becomes too dangerous. Thirty below 
zero is a great stimulator, especially when food runs short, 
and supplies are few and far between. 

The camp was very unwholesomely placed within a dozen 
yards of a large mosquito-haunted marsh, whence the boom 
of the bittern resounded at intervals, like the distant roaring 
of a bull My hardy men never thought of such things as 
damp and miasma, nor, to tell the truth, did I, yet probably 
many a troublesome symptom arose from camping in such 
‘swampy places, though our healthy active habits saved us 
from serious illness. 

At this camp I passed two wretched nights, unwell with- 
out suspecting the cause, but moving on Monday to higher 
ground the change at once cured me. Perhaps some hours 
in the swamp, wading knee-deep after ducks and bitterns, 
had done me more mischief than I knew of.] 

While here I received a visit from Mr. Simpson and his 
half-brother, who were on their way to Fort Garry. They 
stayed an hour or two, and had dinner in my tent. The 
former had‘come straight from Fort Pitt, on the Saskatchewan, 
where, till lately, he had been the officer in charge, He 
brought the unwelcome news that the Crees and Blackfeet 
were at the point of going to war. This, it was evident, would 


"omar. Iv. FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE. 43 


interfere with my intended journey to the Elbow of the South 
Saskatchewan ; it appeared, however, that very little game 
was left in those parts, the four years’ peace between the 
tribes having enabled them to hunt on that generally debate- 
able ground. It seemed likely that I should have to take 
the usual route after all, through a country disturbed by 
constant traffic, with no chance of sport for at least three _ 
weeks. But nothing could be really known till we got to 
Fort Ellice, so I continued to hope for the best. 

Among Mr. Simpson’s horses was one said to be an 
excellent buffalo-runner, and finding he wished to sell it, I 
availed myself of the chance, and bought it from him. This 
animal originally came from the Columbia [iver, and for 
some time belonged to Nahtooss, a Blackfoot chief. “Bichon” 
was the pony’s name, on account of his yellowish hue,—but 
the paleness of his creamy fawn-coloured skin-was hand- 
somely relieved by the blackness of his mane and tail. He 
was upwards of fourteen hands high, rather bare-hipped, 
angular, and coarse-headed, strong however, and on the 
whole not bad looking. 

June 20th—Anxious to get forward, we made an extra 
long march, starting at 4.30/4.M., and going on till 8.30 PM., 
with a couple of halts of two hours -éach. This took us so 
far that we camped near the point where the hunters’ south- 
ward road diverged from the westerly track to Fort Ellice, 
—our own future;:line, Much did I long for the departure 


of our noisy companions, whose presence scared all the game ~ 


away, and robbed the beautiful deserts of their peaceful, 


soothing loneliness. Nature has done much for the country 
we had been traversing that day, and the bright summer 
sunshine did something for it too. It was pleasant to ex- 
change the miserable swamps for low hills of a light and 


a 


44 FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE. omar... 


sandy soil,,covered with poplar groves dotted with scattered 
spruces ; or for open plains, some flat, some undulating, but 
all sound and hard and dry, and redolent of warmth. 
- I was weary of thé half-breeds, and their wasteful, destruc- 
tive ways. Everywhere their ravages met the 
_ eye. Trees ruthlessly cut down or disfigured ; 
young poplars barked for their sap; noble 
spruces shorn of their branches,—a wretched 
top-knot left to keep the tree alive, that it 
might bear some jovial voyageur’s name, whose 
“ lob-stick” it had been created, after a whisky-~ 
drinking over the ruin. . 

Fervently as I wished them away, it cheered one’s spirits 
to see the hunters on their march. There was infinite pic-, 
turesqueness about them, Their long moving columns 

‘sparkled with life and gaiety. Cart-tilts of every hue flashed 
brightly in the sun, hosts of wild wolfish dogs ran in and out 
among the vehicles, troops of loose horsés~ pranced and 

galloped alongside. The smartly-dressed, men were riding 
their showiest steeds, their’ wivé$ and daughters were 
travelling in the carts, enthroned offfich heaps of baggage. 
Many of the women Wéte-gleatly’ of” ynmingled Indian blood. 
Tall and angular, long masses of straight black hair fell over 
their backs ; blue and white cotton gowns, shapeless, stayless, 
uncrinolined, displayed the, flatness of their unprojecting 
figures, - Some wore a gaudy handkerchief on the head, the. 
married bound one also across the bosom. 

In M. B——’s first cart there sat-a singularly handsome: 
girl, a dark-complexioned maiden of the mixed French 
descent. As with so many of her race, her countenance bore 
a half-shy, halfdisdainful expression : she looked like one 
who would be amiable to few, ill- -tempered to most, but true 
to the death to her husband or her lover. . 


° 


A LOB-STICK, 


om 


CHAP, IV. FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE. 45 


The hunters were all in their summer clothing, wearing 
the usual brass-buttoned blue capot, with moleskin trowsers 
and calico shirts. Wide-awakes, or cloth caps with peaks, 
were the favourite head-coverings. Gaily-embroidered saddle- 
cloths and belts were evidently geferred to those of a less 
showy appearance ; red, white, and blue beading, on a black 
cloth ground, seemed to form the mdgst general arrangement. 

Mr, R——, who accompanied u¥ part of the way and 
slept that night at my camp, rode beside us on a well-bred old 

white horse adorned with showy red-and-black trappings. . 
He himself wore the dark-blue capot, a black cap, and 
black moleskin trowsers and moccasins, and to English 
notions. looked a most unsportsmanlike figure, but like all the 
rest he rode'gracefully and well. 

They sit very upright, with the leg nearly straight wp and 
down., Their saddles are exceedingly 
small, either mere Indian. pads, .or fe 

narrow Spanish frames, high before Ser 
and behind, with a long peak to the 
front. Over such a frame they strap — "ALF areeb’s sranist 
a blanket, and sometimes also place 
another beneath, but nothing can keep these ill-contrived 
saddles from galling the horses’ backs. 

June 21st. —M Bay had spoken much about the dangerous | 
position of ‘our samp, as dying in the direct war-path of the . 
Sioux, so when in the morning it was reported that Black, 
Morgan, and Vermont were amissing, I feared that they were 
lost: for ever. Happily they had only strayed, and not more 
than an hour was wasted in tracking and recovering the 


er 


wanderers, 
This was another lovely day, b but, for all that, we rejoiced 
when a thunderstorm came on, for it drove away those pests 


— 


‘ 


46 FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE. HAP. 1 


—the venomous, eye-blinding, hard-skinned, little sand-flies. 
Yesterday another enemy had troubled us—certain huge- 
headed gadflies, of hornet appearance, that are commonly 
known as “bulldogs.” Darting on man or horse, the wretch 
gives one short bite with his scissory clippers,—then off like 
a flash, leaving a poisoned and bleeding wound. 

‘The insect tribe is a perfect curse ; one has no rest or 
peace. Mosquitoes on the wet ground and. sandflies in the 
dry, bull-dogs in the sunshine, bugs in the oakwoods, ants _ 
everywhere—it is maddening. . . . The fever caused by 
these bites is what most distresses me. It is worst at nigl 
when one gets warm in bed; all the veins swell and: g 
and seem full of liquid fire’ ; 


After dinner we.were detained till three (ctoek- by inother 
thunderstorm, and then made a four hours’ rh 3 rough a 
prairie country with numerous small Igkes~aboufiding in 


ducks. I shot a few, but my sport (was \much interfered 
with by a dog we had brought with us—detriever that would 
not retrieve. . ——— 
This detestable animal, Hector by namg, a large, red, 
curly-coated water-spaniel, I had, bought rather hastily from 
aman at Red River, who gave him a high character; but 
the dog was an impostor and a,nuisance. He would go into 
the water after a dead or wounded duck, secure it zealously, 
and bring it with him in’the most promising style, but on 
coming near shore he always dropped it just out of your 
reach, and no persuasion could make him fetch it an inch 
farther, _ 1 
Sometimes he amused himself by running forward and 
puttmg ; everything up. It was hard to say if he were more 
knave or fool—and the beast was a coward too. Good nature 


was his only Ny it did not long avert his doom. 


FORT GARRY 'TO FORT ELLICE. 47 


CHAP, Iv, 


M‘Kpy became rather unwell in course of the evening ; 
happilyit was nothing very serious, and some simple remedies 
taker/under my advice—for in the absence ‘of better practi- 
tigers I had to act as doctor for the party—proved perfectly 
cecessful in making a cure. 

J was now beginning to know more about my men, and 
dreatly they all pleased me, as well they might‘ My men go 
on very well ;.I like them all © John M‘Kay I like, 
he is my head man (guide, as we understand the term, I can 
scarcely call him, for he knows but little of the road, and did 
not profess to)—a-steady good man, clever with horses, carts, 
or anything ; he manages the other men admirably, and suits 
me exceedingly well. 

‘ Matheson is a jolly, handsome young Scotsman, singing 
snatches of gay songs all the day. M‘Beath, a Scotsman 
too, grave, tall, and gentlemanlike. Kline, of the mixed 
French descent, active, clever, and very obliging Short, a 
Scotch half-breed, more Indian in his ways than Scotch, an 
extraordinarily active lad, a perfect: shot with either gun, 
arrow, stick, or stone. 

‘Toma, the Iroquois, is generally grave in look, but gets 

n well with the rest,—they are always joking together. I 
find him very attentive and useful. He sings pleasantly 
monotonous canoe-songs as he drives my waggon, sitting 
under the shade of a canvas tilt.’ 

[These extracts are partly from._my journal, partly from a 
letter written about that date. I dwell more fully.on the 
same subject afterwards. ] 

June 22d.—We arrived this afternoon at the Rapid River, 


sometimes called the Little Saskatchewan,* and scowed across — , 


without much labour or difficulty. This stream, where we 


Hh, 
a 
a 


a 
* The word Siskatchéwiin signifies—he river that runs swift. 


ee 


48 FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE. CHAP. IV, 


crossed it, was about thirty yards wide, and of no great depth 
or body of water. The western banks in the vicinity are 
high, and prettily clothed with trees, which come down the 
grassy slopes in groups and patches projected boldly from 
the larger woods that qgwn-the summit. 

M ‘Kay went forwatta mile or two and camped on the 
top of the bank, at the very edge of the descent, Meanwhile 
I took .a twn with Matheson to look for deer in the woods, 
but ‘we got nothing, and the mosquitoes got us; they were 
perfectly dreadful.” Even thé camp-fires did not keep them 
away that night; they ‘came right into the smoke of the 
fires, and bit like tigers,’ 

‘During most of the day’s march I rode Vermont, who was 
by no means as great a favourite as Morgan, though not 
without his good qualities‘ Vermont has gone much better 
since I took to wearing spurs. He is a nice little beast, with 
funny sly-ways of his own. His ears are remarkably small, 
and lie constaritly keeps them pricked forward, which adds 
to his cunning and sagacious appearance.’ 


° 


June 23d.—A fine day, but spoiled by two or three © 


thunderstorms, one especially heavy while it lasted. After” 


breakfast I walked on before the carts and shot ducks till 


dinner time. I only bagged four, though double that number « 


fell, and even for these I was obliged to wade in hip-deep 
every time, for the useless retriever as usual refused to bring 
them out. The country was of the prairie sort, and rather 
flat than undulatingy But every small hollow had its’ swamp 
or lake, in which innumerable ducks made their abode. 
About camping time we came to a pretty piece, of water, 
known as Salt Lake, but as its quality answered to its name 
we did not halt there, but passed on a mile or so farther. 
‘Three notable‘mischances befell us to-day. M‘Kay lost 


~ @ 


a 


CMAP. IV, FORT GARRY TO FORT ELWLICK. “49 


his whip, I lost a particularly good knife, and, worst of all, . 
my watch stopped, and though I set it agoing it never could 
be trusted afterwards. ‘ 

June 24th—Having started-about 5 A.M, we ‘arrived at 
breakfast time at Shoal Lake, another very pretty sheet of 
water, which cannot be much less than ten miles in length. 
There was an agreeable variety of animal life on its well- 
wooded shores. First we observed a wolf prowling round 
the camp, whereupon we took our guns and gave chase, but 
he escaped into the brushwood. Then, a moment or two 
‘after, as I was returning from the fruitless pursuit, I saw 
a moderate-sized, black and white, bushy-tailed animal moving 
slowly among the thick bushes, and shot it, chiefly from motives 
of curiosity. It was a skunk,* a much handsomer creature than 
might be supposed, and not offensiveif killed dead on the 
spot, as happened in this rnstanee--vey fortunately ! for he 
was close to the place where our breakfasts were preparing. 

Soon afterwards I tried my rifle at a loon swimming far 
out on the lake, but he escaped by rapid diving, an accom- 
plishment which renders this bird proverbially hard to hit: 
a modern express would probably- be too quick even for him, 
but my rifles, though fast of their kind, carry no heavier 
charge of powder than the 24 drachms generally given to 
two-grooves of that date and pattern. 

Before starting, I made a grand turn-out of my armament, 
the baggage being in such confusion that nothing was ever 
available when wanted in a hurry. I now had ‘the gun- 
cases neatly arranged in the waggon, putting the more im- 
portant uppermost, and disposing their contents. so that 
anything could be got at iii @ tioment when required. This 

* Mephites Americana, var. Hudsonica, The Hudson's Bay Skunk. See- 


cawk—Oree Indians. —Richarpson, Faun. Bor.-Am, vol. i. p. 55. 
E 


\ 
\ 


50 FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE. CHAP. IV. 


\ 

business finished after great expenditure of trouble, I tra- 
yelled for variety’s sake in the now orderly waggon till 
dinner time, but it was very, jolty- work, so I had Bichon 
-saddled, and rode for the rest of the day.—‘ He went well, 
and is evidently used to gallop on rough ground, but he 
was tiresomely’ anxious to stay with the other horses, and 
when forced 46 go on, neighed incessantly, driving away, of 
course, any’ AM” that might chance to be near’ -I got 
M‘Kay to try him, thinking he would perhaps go more 
quietly under his hand, but it made no difference, it was a 
habit that had yet to be cured. 

June 25th—A short march ‘before breakfast brought us 
into the vale of the Assiniboine, up which we pursued our 
way in the midst of a heavy thunderstorm, till, having come 
nearly opposite Fort Ellice, we halted and camped. The 
river at this part of its course flows on with many windings 
through levels overgrown with brush and timber. The valley, 
above a mile in width, is bounded by high wooded banks on 
either side. It was a pretty landscape, although much was 
hidden by the rain; this partial concealment, however, 
tended to magnify the distances, and add to the scene more 
inportance than really belonged to it. 

In the afternoon M‘Kay and I rode on together to Fort 
Ellice, which is beautifully situated at the edge of the glen 
of Beaver Creek, a deep, wooded ravine that cuts its way at 
right angles through the hills of the Assiniboine vale. At 
the river-side we found a clumsy old scow, in which we took 
our horses ‘across; then we ascended a high bank by a very 
steep and difficult road, which led us to our destination, 
where we were hospitably received by the superintendent, Mr. 
M Kay, accompanied by his father, a retired Company’s officer, 
who was at that time assisting in the management of the Post. 


4 


Yoo 


CHAP, IV. FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE, 51 


After tea we rode back again, returning to camp before 
daylight had quite departed. - 

Sunday, June 26th—Having so little distance to go, we 
resolved to cross, and camp in the neighbourhood of the Fort. 
My men were all busy with the crossing, so I-rode on by 
myself, and, arriving in time to join Mr. M‘Kay at dinner, 
had the pleasure of sharing in some fresh buffalo-tongues 
which he had lately brought back with him from the plains, 
where some of his people were still engaged in a hunt. These 
tongues were excellent, as juicy and tender as possible, 
and came doubly welcome after the perpetual salt meat of 
the last ten days. ; 

Early i in the afternoon the carts, made their appearance, 
having got safely through considerable difficulties both at the 
river and the hill ; and a place well separated from the Fort, 
though not far off, was fixed upon as the site of our encamp- 
ment. I chose for my own. tent-site a sandy level platform 
at the edge of a precipitous bank, 300 feet high, that over- 
hangs the Beaver Creek where it is about a quarter of a mile 
across. It was a pretty place: as I sat on the camp-stool 
near my door, I could see to the very bottom of the deep 
ravine, and follow the windings of its course far upwards and 
downwards, till it lost itself in the distance on ‘either side. 

_ Two Indians, an Ojibway and a man of some different 
tribe, paid me a visit, and were treated to a dinner and a 
smoke. They were evidently interested in my map of British 
America, and seemed quite able to understand it, making * 
shrewd remarks about several topographical matters. 

June 27th—After long consultation with the three M‘Kays, 
I determined to attempt to pass to the Indiam Elbow, going by 
a track that pretty closely follows the course of the river Qu’ap- 
pelle. The chief difficulty was to find a guide, for Jobn 


. 


» #2 FORT GARRY TO FORT ELLICE. CHAP, IY, 


M‘Kay knew nothing, whatever of that part of the country. 


Many of the Fort Ellice men were at the plains hunting 
buffalo, in a different direction, and others were afraid to 
risk their.scalps among the anticipated Blackfoot war par- 
ties ; but at length a suitable person was discovered, a French 


half-breed named Pierre Nummeé,* said to be an excellent’ 


man for my purpose, who fortunately happened to be stay- 
ing near the Fort. Pierre, however, put an extravagant 
value on his services, and I was obliged to promise him the 
immense pay of £25 for one month, and so on in proportion 
for any further period,—the term of service to be only six 
weeks, failing a new and separate agreement. 

" Two ox-cartscame in that morning from the plains, bringing 
a number of fresh buffalo-robes,—“ robes,” it must be under- 
stood, signifying skins with the hair dn, as distinguished from 
those dressed without the hair and made into leather, which 
are simply known as “skins.” They also brought four calves, 
funny little yellow things, very hot and tired after jolting 
‘such a distance in the carts, unsheltered from the powerful 
scorching sun. When taken young enough, these animals 


cin be perfectly tamed ; in proof of which there was an’ in-— 


stance close by, for at that very moment a two-year-old 
huffalo heifer was grazing about quite quictly in the neigh- 


bouring prairie, among the common dairy cows belonging to 
the establishment. 


i 
. , 
” ~ é 


* Inthe Company's statement of accounts this individual’s name is entered 
as Pierre Denoummée, buti ithe engagement drawn up at Fort Ellice, to which 
his mark is appended, the ‘Word 4 appears as Numiné, which'l have retained, a 
it. was the name he always went by whilé in my employ. 


as 


CHAPTER V. 


FORT ELLICE TO QUSPPELLE FORT. 


"THE afternoon was far advanced when we left Fort Ellice. 
Owing to the amount of our stores and baggage it had 
become clear that further means of conveyance were required, 
especially if hunting trophies dropped in by and by to make 
-up extra weight; so we borrowed a couple of carts from 
the Fort, and hired the same number of Company’s horses. 
We also supplied ourselves with two needful things that had 
been omitted~a spade and a scythe. 

At the same. time Mr. M‘Kay did us a good, turn by 
lending us a handsome black pointer named “ Pointer,”— 
brother to that same Blucher who so gallantly chased 
the bear near the river of Red’Lake,” He provéd a most 
useful animal, being.a good retriever and water-dog, besides 
possessing the accomplishments denoted by. his name. 

We camped about twelve miles from Fort Ellice, among. 
swampy richly-grassed prairies, dotted with many detached 
“islands” of poplar which rose dark and high in the midst 
of the expansive sea of plain. 

June 28th.—‘ Pierre Nummé is a quaint-looking oldish 
man, with a dark, bony, French-Indian face, and long black 
hair, He wears leather trowsers, which have become like 
varnished mahogany from stains and hard usage, a blue cotton 
shirt, and a dark-blue woollen, mushroom-topped, lowland 


54- FORT ELLICE TO QU’APPELLE FORT. CHAT. Y. 


Scotch bonnet, such as I remember common in Forfarshire 
in my boyhood, but it has red and white chequers round the 
headpiece, and Pierre has added a glazed leather peak. His 
eyes are weak, so he wears huge goggles made of wire and 
glass, which have a strange effect, throwing a dash of the 
pedantic into his rough and hunter-like appearance. He 
seems a good-natured fellow, and is said to bear a high 
character, 

There were thunder showers during the night and morn- 
ing, and towards afternoon steady rain began, so we made an 
early halt. M'‘Kay took advantage of an adjacent oak-grove 
to lay in a supply of spare axletrees. It interested me to see 
how cleverly the men brought the rough logs into shape with 
no finer tool than the edge of the axe. | 

For my own part, I read Shakspeare’s “Two Gentlemen 
of Verona,” and passed a tolerable tifternoon in spite of the 
rain.—‘ This open-air life suits me well, though; when one con- 
siders it bit by bit, it does not seem so very charming. Long 
wearisome fiding, indifferent monotonous eating, no sport to 
speak of, hard bed upon the ground, hot sun, wet, no com- 
panion of my own class ; nevertheless I am happier than I 
have been for years.’ . ; 

June 29th.—As we went on our w ay in the early morning 
we met a Cree Indian and his wife travelling by themselves, 
with a dog drawing their effects in a little cariole. He was 
a chief's son; and showed us with evident pride a letter to his 
father from the superintendent of Qu’appelle Fort, full of 
praises of the highly estimable parent. At leave-taking I 
gave lim a present of tcbacco, and we parted on the most 
cordial terms, A 

‘After dinner I set up a target, to see if I were in good 
shooting after such long disuse, and made some tolerable hits 


5 ‘ wy x 


cuar.y. FORT ELLICE @&,QU’APPELLE FORT. 


with my favourite Purdey ; then passing the rifle on to M'‘Kay, 
he took two shots, and beat me with the second, which .- 
struck very close to the bull’s-eye. Old Nummé now looked: 
out his weapon, a gun I had got for him at Fort Ellice-—~one 
of the regular “trade” articles, flint-locked, thin-metalled, 
and priced at but a few shillings over a pound in the Com- 
‘pany’s tariff. - 

Putting up a piece of canvas “considerably ‘larger than a 
house door, Pierre withdrew some thirty paces and blazed 
away, but without the slightest result. By no means dis- 
' couraged, the persevering fellow immediately set to work to 
improve his gun. He-filed and hammered 'at, the barrel, and 
twisted it about with his hands, finally he thrust a long 
stick down it, then placing the ,projecting end between the 
cart-wheel spokes, levered with might and main till he 
thought the tube was sufficiently straight. Absurd as all 
this seemed, it really improved the gun, which, being of 
the same pattern as those bought by the Indians and ren- 
dered serviceable by similar rough doctoring, was in time 
likely to become a fairly useful weapon, at ay rate for 
extremely short ranges. 

We found a most pleasant situation-for our evening halt, 
encamping ourselves on the summit of a warm dry knoll, 
carpeted with fragrant wild thyme. At dusk a wolf made 
his appearance, and sneaked slowly past at the foot of the 
hillock, taking care, however, to keep himself more than a 
hundred yards from the tents. Catching up my rifle, I fired 
a hasty shot.at him. I could hardly~see the point sight 
through the growing darkness, but the ball struck ‘hard upd? 
him somewhere, and rolled him over; bevertheless he stag- 
gered to his feet again, and limped towards the thicket he had 
come from. There was a general rush to secure him, the 


56 ' FORT ELLICE TO QU’APPELLE FORT. — cuar. y, 


dogs of course foremost, but Pointer showed none of his 
brother’s pluck, and Hector proved no hero, so with two or - 
three snarls and snaps the wolf put them to rout, and fairly 
made his escape. 

June 30th.— We had now come to a glorious plain. The - 
sandy soil was covered with a short, crisp grass, perfect for 
riding over, had it not been for the treacherous badger-earths, 
which spread themselves into great honeycombs of half-bidden 
holes, undermining the lesser elevations and forming absolute 
pit-falls for a galloping horse. 

Nummé thought we might tind cabrees here, so I mounted 
the Bichon, while he, to my surprise, chose mouse-like little 
Mouldy, and we ‘set off together in search of the antelopes. 
After riding four miles we saw a buck, but could not get near 
hin, We then observed five others, does and young ones, 
and as fresh meat was much WAnted, I determined to go after 
them: in spite of the evident poorness of the lot. Creeping 
hehind a bank, I got within range of the largest one. Her 
haunch was straight to me, but they had taken alarm and 
were in the act of starting on their swift flight over the 
houndless prairie, so I had no choice but to‘shoot at once, 
without much thought of aim; luckily the ball went high,. 
and dropped her lifeless with a broken neck. 

, Pierre cut her up like a juggler doing a conjuring trick. 
One moment, an autelope stretched along the turf,—the next, 
nothing there but a paunch anda ghastly back-bone,— the 
next, Nummé in his saddle blandly triumphant, enshrined 
amidst nicely-cut joints and limbs and strips of flesh, hung 
round him in the tidiest fashion’; no London butcher’s shop 
more severely trim in its pink-and-white array. . 

The cabree is the only antelope in America. It is a 
pretty, buff-coloured creature, less than a fallow deer, and very 


wT 


sed 


. 


CHAP. V. FORT ELLICE TO QU'APPELLE FORT. 57 


lightly formed, in appearance something between a deer, an 


antelope, and a goat. The males have black ‘horns, strong | 


and thick for a few inches from the head, then dividing,—the 
front half projected forward in a short triangular point, the 
other half much longer asid turned backwards in a hook, like 
the horn of a chamois; hence the animal’s name—Antilope 
fureifer, or Prong-hormd Antelope. They are shy and wary, 
and too swift to be approached on horseback.* 

We had a long ride back to the carts, for the men had 
taken a wrong turn and diverged considerably towards the 
river Qwappelle. Feeling tired after so much riding under 
the fierce sun-rays that beat on those shadeless sandy plains, 
1 got into the waggon, and travelled in that manner till we 
halted for the night at the Wolf Iills, a low, rather thickly 
wooded range that separates two open prairies. 

Tt began to blow Yard, and about 10 o'clock a tremen- 
dous thunderstorm broke over us, with torrents of ram at 
intervals. Whenever the rain ceased the mosyuitoes ,bit 


furiously, and drove the horses nearly to madnes§* Several.. 


times that night the men had fd quit their sheltering tent in 
order to keep up the smoke-fires under lee of which our poor 
heasts found refuge from their persecutors. 

July 2d.—Yesterday afternoon we passed along an ele- 
vated “black earth” prairie, camping at Great Creek,—a broad 
valley whgsé sides consist. of round bluffs perhaps 100 feet 


in height, flat on the top, and divided by deep ravines ; but : 


after breakfast-to-day we came to plains of a sandy character, 


* Antilope furcifer.  Apeestat-chwkous, also,, My-attehk—Cree Indians. 
“. The alntilope.furgijer ditfers from the true antelopes, in having a snag or 
branch on its horns, and wanting the cromens or lachrymal openings, and 
also in.being destitute of the posterior or accessory hoofs, there being only two 


on cach foot’—Rrewarnson, Kaun. Bor dnt, vol. ie p. 263. Autilocapra * 


Americana.-—Hinp, Can. Ke. Bap, vol. i p 300. 


’ 


ma 


58 FORT ELLICE TO QU’APPELLE FORT. CHAP. V. 


also at an elevated level, and traversed them till we reached 
a very pretty lake, which, I was told, formed one of a series 
that were connected with the River Quappelle. It is named 
the Lake of the Valley. In size it seemed somewhere about 
a hundred acres, its banks were low and unwooded, its shores 
composed of sand “and pebbles. Farther on it is connected 
with a narrow, river-like piece of water, with steep wooded 
banks, which runs out of the Great Creek. , 

After this I rode. forward on Wawpooss, and went to 
the summit of a bluff, whence there was an extensive view 
over a level prairie, bounded by a stretch of woodland in the 
distance. 

No life was visible except a solitary wolf—or fox—run- 
ning across the plain. Not a buffalo to be seen, though for 
the last two days we had been constantly finding the skulls 
and bones of former herds. M‘Kay, however, discovered a few 
pigeons in a little grove, and shot two or three of them. 

We halted for dinner not far from Qu’appelle Fort, and 
afterwards occupied ourselves with some more target practice. 
At 120 yards, Short made a beautiful shot with his own 
double-barreled flint gun—which was of a class but slightly 
superior to Numme’s single-barrel,—striking very close to a 
bull’s-eye little larger than a half-crown piece. He was said 
to be equally skilful with the bow: they told me that he 
could beat any Indian with that weapon, being even able *to 
put an arrow into a bird hovering on the wing. | 

The noise of our shooting was heard at the Fort, and pre- 
sently an Indian, riding a black horse plenteously bedaubed 
with “white mud” (pipe-clay), came galloping up to recon- 
noitre us. Readily satisfied as to the character of the party, 
he stayed with us a while and regaled himself with meat and- 
tobacco, then returned to announce our approach ; and when 


oe 
Ca 


CHAD. v. FORT ELLICE TO QU’APPELLE FORT. 59 


v 


soon afterwards we continued our march, we almost immedi- 
ately found ourselves in view of a body of horsemen, who 
were awaiting us on the rise of an eminence at no great dis- 
tance‘from the track. They turned out to be Mr, Cardinal— 
the superintendent of the Fort, and five or six young Indians 
in their best array, glorious in paint and ornaments and fan- 
tastic apparel. 


-. . The most striking figure among them was a Cree, who 


wore a beautiful white robe of dressed skin, bordered with a 
vermilion and black pattern that seemed to be meant for rows 
of calumets. They were all well mounted, and rode with 
ease and spirit, and not without 
a certain grace,—though they 
crouched very strangely, like 
wild beasts dropped down from 
trees. One young man amused 
me by the frank artlessness of 
his vanity. Happening to see. 
that I was looking at him, he immediately began to show 
off in the most undisguised manner, stirring up his fiery ~ 
steed to all sorts of antics, the rider, meanwhile, ostenta- 
tiously at his ease, and eyeing me with good-humoured little 
smiles of ineffable self-complacency. 

As soon as we arrived at the Fort, Mr. Cardinal took me 
into a good-sized room, which %e had ‘hardly entered when 


CREE PATTERN. 


- several old Indians came in and joined us. They belonged 


to a party of Ojibways who were waiting here for a short | 
time before following the main body of their tribe to the 


"plains. 


Nothing could exceed the. politeness of these Indians, as 
they seated themselves quietly round the room and smoked 
their, pipes with gentleman-like deliberation,—though with 


50 FORT ELLICE TO QU AP ELLE FORT. CHAR. V, 


more than common enjoyine or they had been weeks 
without the comforts of tobacgo, owing to the total failure of 
tlie stores at the Fort. 
well as smoking, but none of it of the slightest interest so far 
as I could make out. My rifle took their fancy exceedingly ; 
they seemed never tired of looking at it, passing it from hand 


» was plenty of conversation as 


to hand with many adiniring speeches. 

We formed our Ganp about a mile from Fort Qu’appelle, 
hoping to be a little out of reach of visitors, but before we 
were well, settled the Indians came throngimg-in. — There 
were twenty-four men inal] »mostly Ojibways. One of the 
party, however, a young’ man of, pleasant appearance named 
“Les Prairies,” was the’ son of “Fox,” a well-known: chief. of 
the Plain Crees, and others of the same tribe -wére “there also. 
They were the best-looking Indians I had yet seen,—* véry, 
civil, sittmy or lyme quietly round our fire, and touching 
nothing. I sent them a couple of spans.of tobacco a-piece, . 
and double that quantity to each of the two head-men. One 
of the latter presently came forward and thanked me for my 
gifts, at the same time offering a dressed buffalo-gskin of 
no great value. He lingered awhile, then grumblingly told 
M‘Kay that he expected more tobacco in return. M‘Kay, to 
whom T had left all these arrangements, immediately answered 
that we were not traders, and gave him back the skin. © 

The Indians stayed veryJate: I thought we should never 
get rid of them. Many of the women seated themselves a 
little distance off, and watched us with unwearying interest. 
Babies, in little painted cradles, were carried by some among 
their number. Their dress consisted of a tunic which left 
‘the neck and arms baré, a robe above it and leggings beneath.” 
The amen were similarly attired, though no two were eXactly 
wike ; Les Prairies and another Cree had noticeably better 


ms 


CHAP. V, -FORT ELLICE TO QUAPPELLE FORT. 61 


clothes than the rest. One of the head-men appeared in a 
curious cap of ‘badger-skin,—perhaps in allusion to his name, 
“ Pointed-cap.” 

After our visitors left us wolves came prowling about, but 
I could not sucéeed in “getting a shot at these cautious 
marauders. For reasons of their own, which I never hap- 
pened to ascertain, the Ojibways “ danced ” a scalp all night, 
and long banished sleep by their monotonous incessant drum- 
ming. 

Sunday, July 3d.—The Indians, I was told, were much 
ashamed of the conduct of the head man who had offered 
us the skin and then resumed his gift, and blamed him 
exceedingly, being afraid that I would not now visit. their 
* camp and bestow on them some ammunition according ' to 
promise. Of course I meant to make no difference in any 
way. 
Our first occupation ‘that morning was to leave, supplies 
of tobacco with Mr. Cardinal for himself and his people. 1 
then walked to the Indian camp, accompanied_ by M‘Kay, 
who on all such occasions acted as my interpreter. “ Spots- 
in-the-sky” (the head-man who had not behaved badly) as a 
matter of 1ivht received our first visit. His tent, like all the 
rest i that encampment, was a-conical structure’ of buffalo- . 
skins, enclosing a circular space of moderate dimensions. 
‘Several women and children—none of whom were’ pretty— | 
were séated on the ground, also two or three young men, one 
of them industriously at work in making triangulat arrow- 
heads of sheet-iron to fix into a set of light wooden shafts 
which he had already prepared. , 

After due handshaking, old “Spots,” in the politest man- 
ner, invited me to seat myself en a buffalo-robe at the further 
side from the door. He then treated us to a long oration, full 


62 FORT ELLICE TO QU’APPELLE FORT. — cuar.v. 


of rather suggestive acknowledgments of my former liberal- 
ity, and ‘reproaches against the other head-man for his shabby 
and unseemly conduct ; which being concluded, I made a 
short reply to the ancient orator, and M‘Kay then handed 
him some powder and ball to distribute to his people as he 
thought fitting He seemed really gratified, and expressed 
his thanks with genial warmth and friendliness” After this 
‘I took my departure, not forgetting to give some tobacco to 
the women for their own particular use,.as otherwise they 
were likely to have come off but badly. 

We next went to call on Pointed-cap, the rival head-man. 
*We-did not stay long umder his roof, however, for he was far 
less talkative and agreeable than Spots, and plainly enough 
exhibited his discontent with my present of ammunition, 
though the supply was the same as that which had been 
.so well received in the other tent. Nevertheless, I thought 
it best not to seem aware that any want of cordiality existed ; 


so I was careful to make no change in my manner, and when 
I rose to take leave they all behaved with the utmost respect 
and politeness. 

In Pointed-cap’s tent there were two young wives with 
their balies,and two or three girls, —all of them equally devoid 
of good looks. There-were also several young men. I saw no 
curiosities either there or at Spots’s home, nothing indeed worth 
remark except the arrow-making already mentioned. 

In the evening Les Prairies and a-man handsomely 
dressed in the. Cree fashion paid me a visits From the latter 
I obtained a ‘curious w hip, which had its-handle and wrist- 
loop ornamented with mink and fisher" fur, and its thong 
double-lashed towards the point and strung round with pieces 
of copper,—receiving it in exchange for a flannel shirt, a case 
in which both sides had-the best of the bargain. 


CHAP. V. FORT ELLICE TO QU’APPELLE FORT. . 63 


I requested him, and Les Prairies, and the Cree who wore 
the painted robe, to come to me next morning for a private 
present of ammunition ; which they did not fail to do. Old 
Spots also appeared to claim a knife I had promised him. 

[Having much sympathy with the Indiais, I felt sorry to 


have disappointed even an old grumbler like Pointed-cap. | 


But in this case*I acted entirely under M‘Kay’s advice, 
having to consider the likelihood of an early meeting with 
creat camps of the Crees, and perhaps of the Assiniboines, or 
even the Blackfeet, whom it would need all my available 
resources to propitiate, especially as I intended a lengthened 
absence from the Forts, where alone one could procure fresh 
supplies. These Ojibways, indeed, had but little claim, being 
so small a party, aiid rather-beyond the bounds of their own 
proper territory.] 

Nearly all these Indians were painted with vermilion, 


‘which decidedly became them, heightening the richness of 


their swarthy skins and jetty locks, and adding lustre to their 
searching glances; one young warrior, however, had chosen 
to mask his face in a veil of sickly yellow, relieved by scarlet 


a 


spots and streaks encircling both‘his eyes. It was hard to _. 


refrain from laughter at the sight of so extraordinary a figure:*~ 


Certainly, thought I, this is the incarnate god of bile, if such 
a deity there be in any of the paradises. 

A dog happening to pass drawing a “ train” after the 
common Indian fashion, I was amused to see the astonish- 
ment of my little Vermont ponies, unaccustomed to such 
sights at home. With’ pricked ears and starting eyes they 


‘trotted after the marvellous object and followed it wherever 


\ 


it went, till at length the dog managed to slip away and 
make his escape from their inconvenient attentions. 
Last night the wind was exceedingly high and boisterous, 


4 


© wm 


of 


iy 


64 FORT ELLICE TO QU'APPELLE FORT. cusp. vy, 


f 


an 


and it continued so during all the. day; but it fell towards 
evening, and: there:was a’ singularly lovely sunset. I sat at 
my tent dgor till daylight faded into darkness, now gazing at 
the splendour of the sun as he floated, all gorgeous in strong 


orange hues, amidst: the“opaline tinting of the delicate light- 


grey clouds, now looking on the pages of Shakspeare’s 
“Troilus and Cressida :”—ah! with what different scenes 
did my memory come to link the most noble passages of that 
drama. _ 


CREE WHEE. 


CHAPTER VI. 


— 


QUAPPELLE FORT TO THE INDIAN ELBOW. 
— 


JULY 4th—We had arranged for an early start, but. a 
. thunder-storm, with heavy rain, delayed us, and it was 8 
o’clock before we got fairly under weigh. Some of the Fort 
hunters started at the same time for the plains, but they were 
going by a different track, which tended far to the south 
of the unfrequented district. that we were bound for. Our 
own road ran for a while through a prairie with many islands 
_ of sbrush, it ‘then passed through black-earth plains and 
“swamps with occasional sandhills, then traversed a country 
of sandy, rolling character. ; , 
As we were journeying along a cabree rose close to us: 
I could have shot it had not the dogs run forward and chased 
AY; away. This filled up the measure of Hector’s iniquities. 
M‘Kay and I held a court-martial on him, and condemned him 
to death,—as useless, as a fool, as spoiling sport, and as teach- 
ing ‘the other dog bad lessons. The sentence was instantly 
carried out: M‘Kay put his pony alongside, and sent a bullet 
through the éulprit’s heart. As the poor wretch lay dying, 
Pointer, a generally good-natured dog, flew at him and 
worried him savagely, though he had never had a quarrel 
with his ill-fated companion. 
Towards evening we saw several wolves, and ran a very ° 
fine white one, but could not overtake him.* While we were 


* Canis lupus, occidentalis. The American Wolf. Variety B., Lupus 
F te ~ 


a4 


66 QU'APPELLE FORT TO CHAP. VI. / ~ 
_ 


camping, however, near a large wood,—some miles beyond 4 
place called Long Point, where Nummé had passed ‘three 
years with certain free traders,—our wolf again made his 
appearance, so I slipped out alone and tried to. stalk him 
‘among the bushes. I got within a hundred yards, but by that 
‘time it had grown too dark for shooting at any such distance, 
and to get nearer proved impossible, for he quickly discovered 
me and kept just out-of reach. 

July 5th.—I stalked two cabrees, and put a bullet through 
one of them at 130 yards. He ran some way and lay'‘down. 
As J approached him he got up and ran again: I-gave him 
another ball it failed to stop him, though it grazed his 
backbone, ‘making the hair fly up like spray from a fountain. 
Following on with Nummé, I got anéther- chances; I thought 
I had-missed, for the antelope went'on; but no, ‘he stopped 
‘ short, swayed about a little, and fell sdead-—the bullet ,had 
.grazed his heart. He had but small horns, being only a two- 
year old buck, worth little except for eating, and not very 
much for that purpose, owing to his extreme leanness. 

Then began a Jong ride across fine rolling sandy plains, as 
we made our way to the Qu’appelle, in which direction the carts 
were travelling, but at last we reached the pretty valley 
through which that river flows towards its ultimate junction 
with the Assiniboine. Bluffs 200 to 300 feet high, much 
scored (apparently by torrent# in the spring), and in some 
places in deuble and triple range, bounded a vate varying 
from a mile to half-a-mile in width, Through this nleandered 
the Qu’appelle, at that time of year a shallow stream some 


- albus. There are five varieties—viz. A, B, C, D, E :—Grey Wolf (AMayhagan— 
Crees), White, Pied, Dusky, and Black, all much of the same size and 
character. Wolves vary in size in different districts ; the length, exclusive of 
tail, is from 4 feet to 4 feet 4 inches; and height at shoulder. from 2 feet to ~~” 
2 feet 10 inches.—-Ricuanvson, Faun, Bor.-Am., vol. i. pp. 60-72. : 


rv” 


CHAP. VI. THE INDIAN ELBOW. a 67 


twenty yards across, pursuing: its ‘vinding course ‘through 
endless brushwood and small poplar groves.* 

We crossed the river and ascended the opposite bank, 
° taking with us supplies of wood, as a wide, bare,Sandy expanse 


lay before us, dotted with small hillocks and utterly devoid of” ~ 


treés or brush, though not altogether wanting in_fuel, being 
thickly strewn with dry buffalo dung—“ bois des prairies’ *T 


believe the French voyageurs call it, it is sometimes also — 


spoken of as pifalo’ chips. We frequently” *used it in. our 
camp fires. Lye rathér liked to burn it, as it throws out a very 
pleasant’ strongly ‘aromatic smell redolent of wild thyme and 
other herbs of the ‘prairie. - 

‘The swamps were almost dried up, so we had to march 
hard and far in search of a good camping-place, which at 
length we found at the side of a small lake. Wé expected to 
meet Indians, but they had gone on, which [did not at all 
regret. Another cabree gave me a chance this afternoon, but 
I missed him; however, I was more lucky with a young, 


wolf, which Kline’ saw lying ina hollow about eighty yards : 


from the track. 

‘The sandflies were most troublesome all day, and towards 
evening the mosquitoes came out in force. The latter I 

divide into three classes: the common brown; the large soft 

drab; and the fierce little black—Quirk, Gammon, and Snap!’ 

[I named them thus after the well-known firm of lawyers in 


*' “The Cree name of the Qu’appelle river is Katapaywie sepe, and this is 
_ the origin of the name ‘as told me by the Indian :—A solitary Indian was 
coming down the river in his canoe many summers ago, when one day he 
heard a loud voice calling to him ; he stopped and listened, and again heard 
the same voice as before. He shouted in reply, but there was no answer. He 
searched everywhere around, but could not find the tracks of any one. So 
from that time forth it was named the Who Calls River. "HIND, Can. Ex. 
Exp. " vol. i, p. 370. 


ohe 


€ : . eet an & 


68 QU’APPELLE FORT TO CHAY. VI. 


‘Lon Thousand a Year, The Quirks were pertinaciously blood- 
sucking, in a humdrum, respectable manner ; the Gammons” 
alighted like thistle-down, and drank your blood with tender 
slyness ; the Snaps rushed-in with sudden fury, and nipped 
more than they sucked, though careful not to go enipty 
away.} 

Poor thin-skinned Pointer made most absurd contortions_, 
as he writhed under the bites of these tormentors, It seemed 
as if they came as ministers of vengeance to punish him for 
his cruelty to Hector. 

Nor was this the only trouble that immediately befell him. 
That identical night, as I was settling myself to sleep, tired 
and feverish from the heat of the weather, I was wakened up 
by loud and terror-struck yelping, and in & moment Pointer 
rushed trembling into my tent, seeking refuge from a large 
white wolf, which, in his anxiety to devour our well-fed 
dog, had ventured into the very camp in pursuit of him, — 

going close by the place where all the men were sleeping in 
thie open alr. 

" Awoke by the disturbance M‘Kay reached 1 Sit for his gun, 
and with one shot ended the career of this voravions enemy. 
It was a wolf of the largest size, a gaunt old monster, with 
teeth worn to the sockets from long use. No vestiges of food 
were to be found in his stomach ; sheer hunger had doubtless 
driven him to his unusual act of daring. It-was the last night 
he could have crept in unperceived, for we afterwards kept 
regular watch, having come to a more dangerous part of the 
country, where our horses required protection from the attempts 
- of Indian marauders. 

July 6th.-There was heavy rain in the night and morn- 
ing, and the damp, I suppose, brought on an attack that made 
me feel very weak and ill for a while. After we-set out I 


os 
CHAR. Vi. THE INDIAN ELBOW, 69 
stalked a cabree, put in vain. Then I stalked three white 


cranes, which I had observed looking exquisitely beautiful 
beside a small pool of water'; could not get near them ; tried 


‘a Jong shot, and missed. 


During part of the day we travelled near gbranch of 
the Quappelle, called Long Lake Creek, a stream flowing 
through a gorge of considerable depth. As we came to the 
brink of a steep-sided narrow trench of a glen that runs into 
this valley, we were surprised to find in it a hidden grove of — 


. trees, in one of which araven had built its nest and reared its 
" young. 


We camped at the end of a lake in Stony Valley. So 
intense was the heat that-I was compelled to leave the tent 
door open all night, trying for the first time a muslin mosquito 
net, which was hung from above.so as to encompass my bed 
and form a sort of inner chamber. It answered tolerably 


_ well, but not well enough to repay. the trouble of arranging 


it, so I never used it again——‘ The flies [mosquitoes] are the 
pest of creation, "Welcome rain, wind, sun,—anything that 
annoys and destroys the tormentors !’ 

July Tth.—Marching before breakfast we came to some 
stony: sand bluffs,-where I ran a wolf a little way, but unsuc- 
cessfully. Presently Nummé and I observed a single buffalo 
bull, about half-a-mile from us. He instantly made off, the 
wind blowing towards him, and as neither the ground nor our 


horses suited, we had to let him go his way. : 


Hoping to come on more buffalo, I mounted the Bichon, 
and M‘Kay mounting Wawpooss, we tode on together and . 
searched all the country round. _No game, however, was to 
be seen, except some cabrees in ‘thie distance. Large bands- 
of Indians were evidently in the neighbourhood; in one 
recent camp, probably of Crees, we counted no less than forty- 


LN 


oe 


70 QU'APPELLE FORT TO ONAP, YI. 


two tent-sites, Anxious not to draw their attention, I had 
_ the, canvas tilt removed from the waggon, as it was by far too - 
conspicuous an object. ee 

This was a prairie country of sand and crisp grass, of 
level tracts varied with hills and bluffs and undulations, of 
"many little Jakes and swamps scattered about here and there. 
Flowers of the gayest colour enlivened the landscape. The 
most common were the smal] tiger-lilies and the roses, and 
next came blue-bells and white strawberry blossoms. Some- 
times acres and acres were covered with intermingled masses 
of the orange lily and the pendulous blue-bell, the, whole of 
them so shoxt of stem that the glory of the flowers combined 
with the rich greenness of their leaves, and it seemed as if a 
vast oriental carpet had been thrown upon the plain. 

Towards evening the heat of the weather changed to 
heavy showers, with flashes of lightning at intervals ; we saw 
that a storm was coming, and made haste to camp in a wild 
. rocky valley that offered itself at no great distance from the 
track. Three very young wolves appeared when we entered 
this secluded glen, but I did not care to shoot the poor little 
creatures. The plains:we had been passing through -during 
the day wer thickly strewn with buffalo skulls, the relics of 
former slaughter by Indians or half-breed bunting parties. 
‘We did not see as many ground-squirrels as usual, but, as ° 
usual, saw a pair of small birds chasing a crow’ 

July 8th—The little, wolves kept up-a chorus all-night 
long, heginning each frésh strain with mewing whines, like a _ 
family of peevish kittens, then bursting into tremulous, 
melancholy howls. The effect was very pleasing; it har- 
monised so well with the savage loneliness of the scene, that 
I should have been sorry to miss ¢. this wild wolfish music. 

The rain had ceased, and it was. a fine morning when we 


CHAP. Vi. "THE INDIAN ELBOW. - m1 


resumed our journey. TI again mounted myself on Bichon, in 
case of meeting with buffalo, and carried a twelve-bore gun 
loaded’ with ‘ball, instead of my- favourite rifle. MKay,as 
before, selected Wawpooss. No buffalo were ‘anywhere dis- - 
" eoverable, but we presently observed a large white wolf, anil ; 
at once gave chase. He ran well, so well that I could not get 
near him ; Wawpooss, however, showed his speed, and dis- 
tancing the Bichon, just as he had done i in a race on the pre- 
vious day, he soon. brought M‘Kay all but alongside. Another-. 
moment and a shot would have finished the exhausted wolf, 

but he saved his life by turning suddenly down a steep 
rocky bank that overhung -some swampy shallows of -the 
Quwappelle. I dismounted and followed, but the beast kept 
himself closely hidden in a jungle of high reeds and rushes : . 
I could see nothing of him, and got badly mosqrtitoed for my-— 
pains.” f 

Soon after this we all descended into the valley and 
“halted for dinner.” The heat was intense, not-a- breath of 
-wind stirring ; the earth glowed like a furnace. The air 
swarmed with bulldog flies, the only living creatures that 
seemed to flourish in this stifling atmosphere. 
We made a long halt, and then travelled up the valley 

till we came to the Sandy Hills, the first of which we 
ascended. These hills, covering a considerable tract, are 
about 200 feet high, and are entirely composed of sand_as 
fine as that of the sea-shores. Near them the grass grows 
short and scantily, much as on some of the “links” along 
the Scottish ccast- The Crees fancy that the souls of good 
_ men enter into a paradise concealed amidst these arid ranges, 

while the souls of the bad have to pass over an exceedingly 
narrow bridge, whence they fall intorpits of despair and uiter 
wretchedness. 7 


72. QU’APPELLE FORT TO CHAP. VI, 
T was much disappointed-at seeing no buffalo, for we had 
fully expected to come upon them to-day. The only tracks _ 

of any sort that, we noticed were those of some Americans, _ 
who haying started for Fraser River without a guide, had 
here lést themselves in-the desert, to judge at least from the 
circuitous courses they had been describing. ‘Others of the 
same party had engaged one Whitefoord for their guide from 


-Fort Garry, but he had positively refused to go by the road 


we were following, fearing the Indians, —“ les s sauvages,” as 
the half-breeds call them.’ 

As we toiled onwards through the sand-hills the heat 
became almost unbearable. For miles togéther no water 
could be found. Pointer twice fell into a fit, choking and 
gasping in agony, but both times fortunately when water 
happened to be within easy reach. He had another narrow 
escape for-his life, the waggon very nearly running over him, 
but the wheel merely bruised his Paws, and did him no harm 
to speak of = “§, - 

The horses suffered miserably from the bulldog. ‘flies, 
Poor Bichon, being light coloured and thin of skin, was 
more attacked than the others. The blood ran in streams 
down his cream-coloured sides—he looked as if. he had been 
spurred from head to foot. My arm grew stiff from killing 
his tormentors; again and again I slew seven or eight at a. 


. blow. Sometimes I coynted three or four dozen upon him: 


and this lasted all day, and only ended at sunset. 

‘ Bichon is a pony of original mind. He is not pretty, 
ifideed is getting somewhat elderly, but-he is the most 
amiable of animals, albeit, rather obstinate. Bland affability 


“beams from his -countenanee and rests~on- the_white star on 


his broad forehead. He likes to be petted, and will come up 
to me’ when I am riding another horse to have his face 


CHAP. VI. . THE INDIAN ELBOW. 73 
fad ‘ , 
scratched, which, alas ! it often much needs, for the mosquitoes 
and bulldogs make sad havoc of ‘le pauvre Bichon, 
‘ Of all my horses he is the only one that eats flowers, and. 
I have had many’ a laugh at seeing the old fellow wander 
_off-the track to browse on a tuft of blue-bells or tiger-lilies, 


as “He particularly delights jin certain purple weeds that grow 


in such large tufts as tobe often mistaken at a distance for 
buffaloes. Why is it absurd that a horse should eat flowers ? 
I know not why, but it is. An ancient philosopher died of 
laughter atthe sight of an ass eating roses. ; 

‘Poor Bichon! his worst fault is neighing when parted 
by ever so little from his friends, - - At length he has learnt 
that this is a forbidden practice, so he takes great pains to 
check himself, and at any moment of forgetfulness or strong 
temptation changes his incipient neigh into the funniest little 
«muffled squeaks, ending in a sort of low appealing sigh. . 

“‘T could go on writing for hours’ ébout my horses, for 
having no companion, I am always watching them and 
amusing myself with their queer ways. . 

‘Much might be said about that strange little pony Waw- 
pooss, who looks such a weak, poor wretch, and is really 
‘one of the fastest and most enduring of buffalo-rumhers. He 
is milky white, with red specks on his head and’ neck ; his 

“mane and tail are very Jong and straight and fine, and of a 
silvery glitter ; his skin is as sleek and shiny as satin. = 
‘He has the funniest head that ever was seen, ery large 
about the nose, and his eyes have a most singular expression 
of resigned gravity and patient endurance of life—the endur- 
ance of a Cynic philosopher, of one soured rather than 
unhappy. I call bim Wawpooss, which means Rabbit, 

because he looks like one of those animals ;-—not.one of th 


. silly kind, by no means so, but some austere old buck, who, + - 
‘eh, 


Hk 


- . QU'APPELLE FORT TO THE INDIAN ELBOW. omar. 


under sufficient provocation, would drum handsomely on any 


, spaniel’s ribs ; yet he is very mild and peaceable, and all the. 


other horses bite and bully him.’* 
When evening approached, we béGan to search for a 
camping-place near some good water, but for long in vain. 


M‘Kay and I went to examine several small lakes that came 
into our view; all of them were brackish, and tasted like . 


bad carbonate of soda, Anxious to cool my horse, I rode 
him into one that looked better than the rest; half mad 
with thirst, he plunged his head in and tried. to drink, but 
instantly stopped in disgust. For my own part I could not 


~ refrain, whatever might be the nature of the fluid, sol’ 


_ dipped down my leather cup, and swallogved large draughts 
of the tepid brine, and, parched and feverish as I was, it 
seemed refreshing-in spite of its nauseousness. : 

At last we came to a lake filled near the upper end with 
a luxuriant growth of rushes and wild garlic, among which 
the water proved on trial to be nearly free from salt. This, 
it is said, is usually the case where such vegetation is found, 
whether because the plants have a purifying quality, or 
because they mark the position of wholesome , Springs, I did 
not happen to ascertain. _ 


* Except one or two sentences from my journal, this extract is taken from 


a fetter written about that date to a friend at home. 
. . be 


Wa 


RB 
2 


CHAPTER VII. 
INDIAN ELBOW TO CROSSING OF SOUTH BRANCH. 


JULY 9th. —The, sun was again powerful, but a high. west 
wind cooled the air and rhade travelling far more pleasant. 
About mid-day we arrived at the overhanging brow of a 
yalley, and there, outspread beneath us, I beheld the long 
desired object—the Elbow of the South Saskatchewan. Few 
but Indians have seen this place, as iti is ina neighbourhood 
too dangerous to be much visited. 

‘The river here makes an elbow-like angle, whence is 
derived the name ; its course is nearly due north, and then it 
tums due west. The channel scems about five hundred 
yards wide, just above the turn, and is full of sandbanks, 
which give a shallow appearance to the stream. On both 
sides its banks are broken into bluffs, with wooded ravines 
sloping gradually back to the prairies. As if in continuation 
of [the line of] the lower part of its bend [forming an 
easterly prolongation of the hollow it occupies after its sharp 

‘ turn], runs a valley-a quarter of a mile wide,-at the side of 
which we are encamped. Down’ this flows to it a small . 
stream {ranning due west]* that rises, I am told, about 

_ five miles off in a quaking morass, whence also proceeds the 


.* The “ Aiktow River,” or “ River that turns.’—PaLLiser, HInp. Me 
Hind states, no doubt correctly, that this stream rises in a pond twelve miles 
distant from the Elbow. —Can. Ex. Exp., vol. i. p. 355. 


ie 


t 
76 INDIAN ELBOW+TO CHAP. Vu. 


River Qu’appelle, which at first runs due east, though soon 


____-making-e-northerlyturn-near the Sandy Hills.” The valley 


of the little stream is, in direction, a prolongation of that of 

-the Qu’appelle, but the ground is so elevated at the marshy 
height of land which obstructs it, that water communications 
between the Quwappelle and Saskatchewan would be almost 
impossible.* Arrowsmith’s map [then probably the best 
existing—Sir George Simpson gave me the copy I possess] is 
very faulty here;the-Quwappelle-being-shown to rise some 
sixty miles from the Elbow, instead of within five [? twelve] 
miles as it really does.’ 

‘Mr. Hind describes the South Branch, near the Elbow, as 
“a river of the first class, nestly half-a-mile broad, and flow- 
ing with a swift current, not more than 350 miles from the 
Rocky Mountains, whence~it takes its rise” (Hmnp, Can. 
Ex, Hxp., vol. i p. 366). I cannot help thinking this 
measurement too largely generalised. I could hardly have 

estimated the width of the river at 500 yards if it had nearly 
approached 880 yards (half-a-mile). 

Mr. Hind, however, repeats his estimate of « half-a-mile 
broad”... “at the Elbow” (vol. i p. 388). He else- 
where’ speaks of the same river as continuing “for many 
miles [below the Elbow} about 700 yards broad” (vol. i. Pp. 
382). My own party crossed at a place between twenty and 
thirty miles below the Elbow, and I there estimated the 


* Mr. Hind goes fully into this question.. He considers a juiiction fea- 
sible—*The construction of a dam 85 feet high and 800 yards long would 
send the waters of the South Branch down the Qu’appelle valley-and the 
Assiniboine ‘into Red River, thence past Fort Garry into Lake Winnipeg. 
‘The same result would be produced if a cutting were made through the _ 
height of land in the Qu’appelle valley to the depth of 40 or 50 feet, and 
“dam some 30 or 40 feet high thrown across the South Branch.”—Can. Ex. . 
Exp., vol. i. PP 426- 430. : 


Eye-sketch showing the Elbow of the South Saskatchewan : 
by Lord Southesk, 1859. 


Plan showing the Elbow of the South Saskatchewan : by Afr. Hind, 1858. 
; (See p. 77-) 


te . 


CHAP. VIL CROSSING OF SOUTH BRANCH. , 77 


breadth at 600 yards, the river being considerably in flood. 


——While noting this discrepancy, I admit that Mr. Hind is far 
more likely to be right than*myself, both as a skilled and 
- accurate observer, and as being furnished with scientific 
instruments—if in this case he thought it necessary to use 
them. It is possible our measurements apply to slightly 
different portions of the river. _Mr. Hind uses the general 
words—* at the Elbow,’ while I write—‘just above the 
corner’ [of the Elbow.] ; 
, Another discrepancy I may venture to point out. I 
refer to the obtuseness of the angle at the Elbow in Mr. 
_Hind’s map (vol. i. p. 366). In my own rough. eye-sketch 
I make .the angle far more acute, and in my diary I note 
that the stream flows ‘nearly due north, and then due west,’ 
—my authority for these bearings being merely an accurate 
pocket compass. I observe, however, that in the maps; 
appended to. the Reports of Captain Palliser’s Exploring 
Expetlition (Blue Books 1859 and 1860), the Elbow has an. 
’ angle, which, though intermediate, rather less resembles Mr, 
Hind’s drawing than mine. : . 
On the bank above the Aiktow valley we came for the 
third time on a recent site of the great camp of Indians, 
Assiniboines we then supposed, but I believe they were 
Crees. They had evidently driven all the buffalo before theni 
to the hills about thirty miles up this south branch of the 
Saskatchewan, the farthest point in the Blackfoot ‘direction 
to which the other tribes can venture. In the evening I 
walked with Nummé about the river-banks, but saw nothing’ 
to shoot, and found the mosquitoes quite unbearable. 
July 11th.—After breakfast I rode with M‘Kay and 


Nummé to explore the country higher up the course of the - 


river. We went to the top of a hill about nine or ten miles 


78 INDIAN’ ELBOW, TO "GHAR. Vin. 


a 
off—not a living creature was int sight 5" $0 we retumned,. 
___ Keeping along the siver-side, among little” banlisand-lenotls— 
and patches of wood, but there Vas nothing there either, not 
even a frésh track. 
M‘Kay having subsequently found out that a great band 
- of buffalo had’ crossed the SaskatchéWan ata place not far 
from the Elbow, the question presented itself whether we . 
ought to follow them, and afterwards make straight for Fort 
Pitt,—or travel up stream towards the Cyprés Hills and the 
Blackfoot country, as we had lately thought of doing, After 
some consideration I determined on-the former route, both as 
" offering better prospects of sport, and as likely to be less 
dangerous, for ib lay almost entirely within the territories of 
the friendly Crees. Want of water seemed our principal 
risk in traversing such arid deserts; as to that, however, we 
were ignorant Baugh only judging by hearsay—the remoter 
districts being unkitawn even to our guide. And here an 
unlooked-for difficulty arose,—Nummé, this very guide, quietly 
announced that he would nob go with us to Fort Pitt, al- 
leging that his contract ‘only bound him to take us to Fort 
~ Carlton. . 

* This could not for a moment’be endured. I summoned 
Nummé to my tent, and made M‘Kay read the engage- 
ment aloud, and explain to him that if he refused to guide 
ust wherever I might desire, we would guide ourselves, and 
would send him back forthwith, on foot, and without the 
remainder of his pay—more I could not threaten, for he had 
been partly paid in advance. On hearing this decision he at 
once gave in; said he had merely wanted to know what his 
contract was,—that he had misunderstood something,—that 
he was ready to go anywhere. 


CUAP. VIL CROSSING OF SOUTH BRANCH. 99 


July 12th—We left the Elbow soon after breakfast, and 
———travelled-northwards-down-the-course of the stream, keeping 

as near it as the many ravines permitted. Our object was to 
discover a suitable crossing-place, in order to follow the 
buffalo herd, but it was no easy matter to find one, such 
facilities being rare in that part of the Saskatchewan, owing 
to the general steepness and muddiness of the descent to'the 
water's edge. 

. The river became much prettier pelow the Elbow. The 
banks had a gentler slope, and were less broken into msl 
naked bluffs ; the stream itself was more free from shoals, gnd 
looked very noble in its vast expanse, with level grass-clad pro- 
montories projecting into it at varying intervals, marking out 
its course and diverting it into many a graceful bend. The 
weather was pleasant and genial, though a high easterly wind 
struck hard upon us as we continued our journey. We made 
quick marching over the hard, dry, sunbaked ground, crossing 
alternate hill and plain as we kept along the river-banks, 

‘and it was late in the day when we halted. 

This morning, seeing a cabree buck with a magnificent 
head, I ran him several miles. Vain attempt!: Morgan did 
his best, but could not approach the antelope. Then I ° 
got on Black and ran a doe,—equally hopeless, even the 
swift Black was left far behind. 

As I retumeéd from the second chase I perceived M ‘Kay 
and: Nummé driving a large buffalo before them, which on 
my nearer approach I found to be an old bull, very thin and 
sickly and hardly able to move. It.was a mercy to save him 
from the cruelty of the wolves 3 80, as he had to die, I rode 
past him on Black and gave him a shot for practice’ sake—a 
buffalo’s strange form making him a puzzling mark for a be- 
ginner,—but I placed it too high, as one is always apt to do, 


vo 


80 ’ INDIAN ELBOW TO OHAP; VII. 


and it merely dropped him on his knees, without ‘depriving 
him of. life. I then dismounted, and, walking close up to 
ims aed both bans of tay gun vighb af the centre of his 
forehead. There was no result, no mire ‘than if a clod of. 
earth had struck him: the bull continued in the same posi- 
tion, glaring at me with savage eyes ; the densely matted hair 
on his thick skull had completely defied the penetrative force 
_ of a smooth-bore. M‘Kay then gave me my ‘Purdey rifle. 
At the very first shot the conical bullet passed clean through 
bair and bone, aud the hugéold buffalo rolled over, dead. 
Soon afterwards we saw another bull feeding about, a 
good distance away on the prairie. I mounted the Bichon, 
M‘Kay took his favourite Wawpooss, and we set out, using 
every depression in the ground to conceal ourselves from 
view. The bull, however, quickly observed us, and made 
. off at a remarkably fast pace, with a long start in his favour 
besides. After some miles’ galloping we began to near him. 
M‘Kay was leading, though not by much, and when signs 
~ of the finish appeared, he drew rein and let me pass on. , 
The bull was still running, but in evident distress. Sud- 
denly he stopped short in a small hollow, turned round and 
faced me. Bichon was rather blown, and as I checked him 
at the edge of the hollow he made a great stumble, as nearly 
as possible falling on his head—in which case I should have 
landed directly on the horns of the buffalo. Happily my 
pony recovered himself in time, and the bull remaining at 
bay about ten yards from me, I dropped him with a bullet 
in the shoulder, and finished him witb another in the brain. 
Like many of the males at that season this fine, well-grown. 
.., bull was exceedingly scant of flesh, so we left his carcase, and . 
merely brought in the tongue. Even that was tough eating, 
though far from being rank or ill flavoured. ° , 


“onary. «CROSSING OF SOUTH BRANCH. 81 
Bichon agreeably disappointed me. On seeing the 
___bnffalo he got’ quite excited, and forgetting his usual lazi. 
ness, ran far better than I had at all expected from his 
regent performances. He was a quiet and manageable beast, 
very different fom troublesome Black, who required one’s 
whole attention “when game was on foot. No more buffalo 
appeared that day. _There were numbers of cabree, but the 
plain was too level for approaching them. 

July 13th—‘ As we sat round the fire before turning in 
last night, M‘Kay and Matheson told me some interesting 
stories about the Indian magic, ‘ medicine’ as they term it. 
The Crees, it seems, are the most noted for these mysterious 
arts. Some of them, when wishing to injure another man’s 
horse, either through jealousy or to secure a race, are able to 
destroy its galloping powers for ever by rubbing. a -certain 
substance on its legs. There is a hunter at Edmonton who 3 
was the swiftest-footed runner in the district.. While he was 
sleeping, some Indians who were in the same tent rubbed 
his legs with magic stuff ; thenceforth his power left him, and’ 


has never since returned. 
‘There are Indian conjurors who will allow themselves to 
be bound from head to foot with nets, cords, straps, or any- 
_ thing ; then, entering their small ‘ medicine tent,’ it is seen 
to heave violently for about five minutes, after which all the 
fastenings are thrown out at the top of the tent, not one knot 
being disturbed, and the wizard steps forth perfectly free. 
This: I had heard before from’ James M'Kay and also from 
his brother ; it was Matheson who began speaking of it last 
night. Angus M‘Kay (another brother) once tied a leaf of 
a Bible in the net, and the conjuror presently declared he 
could do nothing till it was taken away! . 
‘John M‘Kay and Matheson both vouelied for the follow- 
G 


82 INDIAN ELBOW TO ; CHAP. VIL 


ing story. Two Red River men of their .aeqnaintance (whose 
names they mentioned) beat_an Indian for stealing their 
clothes. A day,or two afterwards the men both went raving 
mad ; they spoke constantly of-the Indian, they even told 
where he would be found when people were sent to apprehend 


him, and sure enough he was’ discovered hidden in that very 
place. These two men have been subject to similar attacks 
ever since, and cannot stand the least drop of strong liquor. 
The charm is said to be wrought by conjuring with a lock of 
the victim’s hair. ° 

M‘Kay told me that an uncle of his had a wonderful 
power of seeing what took place at a distance—second-sight 
in fact. He did not dream, but sat rapt in meditation, and 
then told what he saw. He constantly directed the hunters 
to where the buffalo were te be found. Onone occasion a man 
(whose name was mentioned) had half his gunlock blown off, 
when firing at a cow. Assisted by his friends, he searched. 
for it everywhere, but in vain. Next morning the seer said 
to him—‘ The lock is about ten yards from where the cow 
fell. It is close to a badger heap, and you will see it glitter 
in the sun as soon as you get near” Believing-in his powers, 
they went, though the distance was long, and all happened as 
he had declared it to them. 

‘Once some horses were lost. He told the owners to go to 
a valley near Scratching River, where they would find a. cer- 
tain number of their animals, They went; all was as he had 
said. This seer’s power suddenly left him a few years ago. 

‘There is a well-known hunter at (name mentioned), 
said to be a very good, religious man, and he solemnly vouches 
for the truth of the following story. He was one of the best 
shots in the country, and was owner of a particularly good 
gun. One day an Indian came in, took up the gun, looked 


rie 


CHAP. VI, | CROSSING OF SOUTH BRANCH. 83 


at the lock, handled it a little, and then walked away. The 
hunter went out lunting as usual, to his surprise he couldhit 
-nothing. He cleaned and examined his gun ;—it seemed all 
right, and shot perfectly at a mark, but again and again he 
found that he missed every living creature with it, though 
with other guns he ghot with all his former skill. Some time 
afterwards the | Indian returned. The hunter told him what 
had happened. ‘Oh,’ said the Indian, ‘ give me your gun. 


HEAD OF A CABREE, 


+ - - 
I will make it shoot for you again? So saying, he took it 
up, handled it a little, and returned it to its owner. Thence- 
forth the hunter could kill game with it as well as ever’ 


During our march this morning I rode a good way-into the 
plain, leaving the carts on the track, and on rejoining them 


‘ 


84 . INDIAN ELBOW TO per. vn. 


where they had halted near the river, I found that MKay, 
had just wounded a large cabree buck. It had run some dis- 
tance, but I followed on till a lucky chance occurred and 
enabled me to finish it. As the head was very fine, I had it 
prepared for stuffing.* 

After this, we saw a buffalo bull lying at the foot of a 
sand-hill, his huge, brown body looking strangely sombre.in 
its contrast. with the pale yellowish bank immediately behind : 
it. I hastened to mount the Bichon, M‘Kay mounted the — 
impetuous Black, and, managing to get near the bull before 
he’ observed us, we soon pressed him hard, though hej ran 
exceedingly well. Finding we had the speed of ki he 
suddenly faced in my direction, and made a half charge) as if 
doubtful whether to fight or fly. I shot at his shoulder but 
missed him, then on he came—with no want of purpose this 
time. I waited till he got within ten yards, then turning in 
the saddle I fired my other barrel,—a second failure, for at 
that moment’ the experienced old Bichon made a quick side- 
leap to avoid the horns of the bull, which all but grazed 
us as he passed,—onward he’ went, aid never looked back 
at me, but rushed savagely at M‘Kay who had now just 
opened upon his) view. With ready movement M‘Kay 
drew his horse ot of danger’s way, and tried for a flank 
shot,—snap ! his gun misses fire; the bull, however, made 
no further ‘attack, /but went off as hard as ever he could 
gallop. a . 

By this time my rifle was reloaded ; I followed the fugi- 
tive, and. soon: got abreast of him. Again I missed—or at 

*The horns medsure 143 inches in extreme length, following the curve. 
The length from root of horn to divergence of upper part from triangular snag 


is 5} inches.’ The distance from point to point of horn is 8} inches; from 
point to Point 0 of f snag, 124. Width between rc roots of horns, from.3 to 34 inches. 


cHap.vn, , CROSSING OF SOUTH BRANCH. “ ~ 86 


least did not kill; he was hit, perhaps, ba bulletZholes are | 
invisible in the thick wool about a buffalo’s eck and shoul-’ 
ders : however, hit or miss, for some good reason he presently | 
stopped, and stood motionless. I rode close up to him, took . 
steady aim, and shot him through the heart. 

‘T.do not think a buffalo bull near so terrible-looking as 
a common bull, nor does he seem to be very rapid in. his 
movements :—so runs my journal, but I believe that I was. 
underrating the power and speed of the buffalo, being deceived . 
by the lumbering awkwardness of his action, and the grotesque 
wildness of his appearance. There was certainly one very. | 
critical moment in the adventure just recorded, nothing but 
Bichon’s readiness having saved me from a possibly fatal 
overthrow. 

Immediately after this another old bull presented himself, 
and, thinking that a little sport would please the men, I 
offered to let any one run it who felt that way inclined. 
They settled that Duncan, being a stranger, should have the 
first chance, so I lent him Bichon, with my gun and saddle, 
and M‘Kay and he set off together. When they approached 
closely the buffalo charged with some savageness, and Duncan 
was unable, to get a proper shot; however, they drove it 
nearly up to the camp, when several bullets being put into 
it, it fell dead, and its carcase rolled into the river. It proved 
to be the best bull yet killed, though very far from fat. 

All this time I was having a severe chase after a wolf, 
which I pursued on foot, while M‘Beath, riding slow little 
Nez-blane, endeavoured to cut it off and faree it to go in my 
direction. Being a lame and sickly snimal was soon over= ~ 
taken by the pony, but nothing would induce it to turn, 
regardless of shouts, and lashings from a heavy whip, it’ 
obstinately headed towards the plains. i followed at a good 


wo aS ‘ ned 
. aN. ‘ ae 


86 a , DIAN ELBOW TO, CHAP. VII. 

) in, Qo 

e re aa ebut its pace was a. little faster thon. inine,—I could-no--—- 

“hore. ‘overtake it than—M* Beath could make it change its 
course. ..Aftex running a mile I grew very hot and weary, 
for the sun was powerful and the chase up-hill, ‘so, pausing 
fora moment to draw breath, I chanced two long shots at 
the fugitive, and luckily broke one of its hind-legs, which 
Pointer, who had been ke@ping his distance, no soouer 
observed than he valorously ranrin and bit at thésyounded 
animal’s hauncheé, just as he had done to pour Hector when 
in his dying agony. After this the wolf was quitkly finished. 
_It was a female of the large white variety, but extremely 
thin and wasted from some injury or disease. 

Feeling tired after the chase, I put on a swimming-belt 
and refreshed myself with a bathe in the turbid river; 
but I took care not to venture far from land, for the current 
was tremendously strong and rapid, and the belt helped 

-much less than I had expected. The Saskatchewan, which 
was in a very flooded state, seemed to me to measure about 

_ six, hundred yards across. Two or three flat sandy islands 
just showed their heads above the rush ‘of the stream. 
The banks at that part were comparatively low, and sloped 
gradually fram the prairie till within some fifty feet of the 
water, when a steep pitch intervened. 

The whole place abounded with the berries we had been 
feasting on during the last week. ‘They grow ona willow: 
like bush, and taste like geans or wild cherries, but. sweeter. 
In size they resemble common white currants, and are of a 

purple colour. M‘Kay calls them Shad (?Shade) berties ; 
the Indian name is Meesasskootoom-meena.’ * 
All this evening we were busy with preparations for cross- . 


* Amelanchier Canadensis. Afesaskatemena—Crees. —Hixp, Can. Be. 
fap, vol, i. p. 373. Aronia ovalis. Afecsasscootoom-mecna—Crees. ‘This 


OMAP. VIL. CROSSING OF SOUTH BRANCH, 87 


ing the river. ‘The.men worked at frames for two flat- 
bottomed canoes. They placed six stakes in the ground to 
mark out the shape, and round these (which they afterwards 
removed) they made an-:open frame of light wood, with ribs 
still lighter. The whole was tied together with bark or 


' leather thongs, then an oil-cloth was stretched over [and 


securely fastened at the gunwale.*] The Indians use pre- 


. pared skins to cover the outside.’ 


a 


Duncan and I tried our hand at bait-fishing, but/we soon 
gave it up, for we could catch nothing but some soft-looking 


‘little fish of a kind considered hardly fit to eat. . [I believe. 


that these fish were “suckers” (Catastomus Hudsonius,— 
Grey Sucker, Carpe Blanche ; Namaypeeth—Cree Indians), a 
species of. carp of which four varieties appear to frequent 
the Saskatchewan, the whole of them stated by Dr. Richard- 
son to be little “esteemed as articles of food, being soft and 
atour en, bile.” Aecording™ to the same authority, the 
average length of the grey sucker is eighteen inghés. 
Unfortunately I made but small i inquiry-< -ag to the fishing 


abounds on the sandy plains of the Saskatchewan. Its wood, named, iby 


- a 
the Crees Aeesassquat-ahtick, is prized: for making arrows or pipe- -stems, and 


is thence termed by the Canadian voy ageurs ‘bois. -de fleche. Its berries, about 
the size of a pea; aré “the finest fruit in the country, { and are used by the Crees 
: both in a fresh and‘dried state. They form a pleasant addition to 
Pemmican, and make excellent puddings, very little inferior to plum-pudding.” 
—Hooxer, Flor. Bor.--Am., vol. i. p. 202. , 
* Catlin makes mention of somewhat similar canoes as in tise Among the 
Mandans of the Upper Missouri. ‘‘ The skin canoe ” [*‘more familiarly. called 


in this country a bull-boat "—Vol. i p. 195.] . . . is made almost tound”~ 


like a tub, by straining a buffaloe’s skin over a frame of wicker-work, made 
of willow: or other boughs. . . . These canoes are made in the form of the 
Welsh coracle, . . . which is a very curious circumstance, inasmuch as they 
are found in the heart of the great wilderness of America, where all the.other 
surrounding tribes construct their candes-in decidedly different forms, and of 
different materials.”’"—Caruix, North Am. [Indians, vol. ii. p. 138. 


a / 


t 


88 . . INDIAN ELBOW. ‘ CHAP, VII. 


capabilities of the Saskatchewan ‘Streams, and my own party 
only tested their resources on one other occasion,—I refer to the 
capture of some fine trout (October Ist) in the Bow River, 
the principial head=Wwater of the South Branch. , On consulting 
Dr. Richardson’s treatise, I do not find that any salmon exist* 
“in the Saskatchewan, whose generally turbid water would 
appear but little suitable for them,—the fish more or less 
directly indicated by him as its inhabitants being :—The 
Sterlet or Sturgeon, the Barbot, the Sucker, the Hudson’s 
Bay Perch or Piécarél, the Trout, and the Gold Eye. . Besides 
these, the Catfish or Barbue; and the Pike or J. ack, are referred. 
-to,—the former as “found sparingly.in the lakes that flow 
into‘the Saskatchewan ;” the latter ‘as “abundant in. every 
lake in North America.”—(FRANKLIN, Journey to the Polar 
Sea, ann. 1819-22. “App. pp. 705-28,—Notices of the Fishes, 
by Dr. Richardson.)-- Dee ett Loe 
The White Fish (Coregonus Albus)‘is also exceedingly 
abundant in many lakes of that district, but I have never 
heard of its occurrence in the rivers with’ which they com-. 
municate. | . 


7 Ze 
a We Ty 
Ge 


eee > 


“ ! 


al ‘ 
4 , : SKIN CANOE FRAMES. 


CHAPTER VIIL . 


SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN TO CHERRY BUSH. 


| JULY 14th.—‘ The river crossed this afternoon. All and 


’ everything safe—thank God., Some of’ the horses nearly 
went under, but all got through at last.’ [There were great 


differences in their modes of swimming ; some of them floating 


high in’the, water, while ‘with others little but the’ nose 
appeared above the surface, and their utmost efforts seemed 
scarcely to prevent them from sinking. ] 

"We began by unloading the carts, after which the men 
pushed and pulled them through’ shallows to a half-dry flat, 
in ordinary times a long projecting spit of sand but now a 
sort of island, a good way distant from the bank of the river. 
Thence they were passed to the other side on the oil-skin 
scows, which also took all the baggage across’in several 
separate transits. For my own part, I was quickly and 
easily ferried over by Toma and Matheson, in an unladen 
boat. 
Indians, we e discovered, had lately availed themselves of 
‘this’ very crossing-place. Close at hand we came upon the 
recent traces of an extensive camp. I picked up among the 


tent-sites a piece of hard grey stone, not unlike a-coarse sort 


of agate, also a, broken bit of ore, both of which seemed to 
_ have been used for some particular purpose. Fragments of 


em 


marble and red agate were scattered here and there on the ; 


90 _ SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN TO cuar. vu. 


river-banks, Wild strawberries, in full ripeness, grew plenti- 
fully near our encampment. Small and deficient in flavour, 
thongh pleasant to the taste, they much resembled the variety 
so common in the woodlands of Europe. 

July 15th—We continued our march in a westerly 
direction, and after some twelve miles over a country of 
. dried-up swamps and sandhills, we arrived at a brackish lake 

about five miles long and of a similar breadth. Its name; if 

it had one, was unknown, this road being little frequented ; 

even Nummé had never travelled: by the line we were fol- 

lowing, though he had been on hunting expeditions in the 
- neighbouring country. — 

The bulldogs were swarming all around. I killed fifty as 
a sort of sacrifice while Toma was cooking my dinner, and 
might easily have doubled the number had I been so inclined. 
But it was impossible to clear the tent of such thronging 
legions, besides they were unpleasant to crush, owing to the 
stickiness that exuded from their large fleshy bodies. 

After dinner we marched some ten miles farther till we 
came to a branch of Eagle Creek,* where we halted, as “the 
stream was deep and miry, and umore than twenty yards 
ACTOSS. 

While camping went on, I rode a mile” or two into the 
plain in search of cabrees. A'small herd coming in view, 
I dismounted to look at them, upon which Morgan took 
advantage of a moment’s freedom, while I aa Dieting my 
telescope, and galloped straight to the other horses, leaving 
me a hot and weary walk home. ; 

‘This is the greatest trouble one has —all the horses are 
so unwilling to leave one another. They are always looking 


* So at least Nummé termed it, but I have my doubts as to his accuracy 
in this and other similar instances, : 


CHAP. VUI. * CHERRY BUSH. 9] 


back and creeping when you are forward, they edge in towards 


the carts if you are at one side, and they pull and go at a jog- 
trot if you stay behind. Then they neigh constantly, dis- 
turbing game, and in short drive one mad. Vermont is 


worst, but Bichon is very bad too. He is nearly cured. of 


neighing nuw. One cannot stand much provocation here. 
: After travelling hours under a burning sun, tormented by 
flies, bathed in sweat, and parched with thirst, unreasonable 
conduct on the part of one’s horse makes one hardly an 
" accountable being’ ' 


. 


July 16th—This morning hrought us the good news that. 


a vast herd of buffalo were close at hand.* We hastened to 
cross the creek, and passed through it with no-accident worth 
mentioning ; this accomplished, we began to make arrange- 
ments for a hunt on the largest scale within our power. 
Limited by the number of our buffalo-runners, only three of us 
were to be on horseback. The Bichon was, as usual, my own 
choice; M‘Kay, on Wawpooss, was ‘to keep near me fora 
while, and initiate me into the sport ; old Nummé, at his own 
particular request, was to ride Black,.that most unruly of 
animals. For the sake of quick loading I took’a smooth- 
bore instead of my rifle, by which I also gained the advantage 
of a larger bore. 


* * Bos Americanus. American Bison. Buffalo—Hudson's Bay Traders. 
Moostoosh—-Cree Indians. .. . . ‘“‘ The Bison, when full grown, is said to attain 
at times a weight of two thousand pounds; but 12 or 14 ewt. is generally 
considered a full size in the fur-countries. Tis length, exclusive of the tail, is 
about eight feet and a half; its height at the fore quarters upwards of six 
feet, and the length of its tail is twenty inches.”—Ricnanpson, Faun. Bor.- 
Am., vol. i. pp. 279, 283. “The buffalo bull often grows to the enormous 
weight of 2000 pounds.”—Caruin, North Am. Ind., vol. i. p. 247. It is 
possible that the buitilo on the south of the Missouri, where Catlin hunted, 
may average a greater size than those roaming farther north in the Saskat- 
chewan districts. 


92 SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN TO ~ cuap. vit. 


We soon sighted the buffaloes. They were on a dry 
prairie, slightly undulated in character, here and there hilly, 
and bounded by higher ranges to the west and towards the 
north. Immense herds were stringing across the whole face of 
the country. The deep rolling voice of the mighty multitude 
came grandly on the air like the booming of @ distant ocean. 

As we got nearer the herd we could see that a large pro- 


portion were bulls. - They were drawn up in close array ;_ 


some colossal old fellows stalked about by themselves at the 
flanks of the columns. The cows were mostly wedged up in 
the front and centre, while the van kept slowly moving on. 

When within two hundred yards or so we dashed forward ; 
they quickened their pace, but kept their order ; we got pretty 
close to them, the column broke, and the buffaloes cantered 
off in many separate bands. 

Choosing out a small drove of fine-looking cows, M‘Kay 
and I galloped towards them side by side as hard as ever we 
could go. The harder we pressed the swifter they ran ; they 
went magnificently, far faster than the bulls; we tried our 
utmost for 4 good mile, but could not.overtake them. 

Presently M‘Kay cried out that Wawpooss was done,— 
poor beast, he was still weak from an attack of illness some 
days before. There was no time for questions ; putting spurs 
into the Bichon’s yellow sides, I sailed’ away after the 
cows. On we went,—the ‘heat intense, the dust perfectly 
blinding. Pulling hard, straining every nerve, Bichon drew 
nearer and nearer, his laziness quite forgotten in the excite- 


ment of the chase, but not for a moment could we get along- ° 


side. He began to flag,—it was a case of now or never, I stood 
in the stirrups and leant over his head, held my gun forward 


at arm’s length, took the level of the cows, and fired into the ” 


heaving mass where the best ones seemed to be. To my joy 


cHAR. vitt CHERRY BUSH. 93 


one of them instantly stopped ; the others rushed madly on 
their course, but she crawled slowly along, her bowels -pro- 
truding from a great-wound in her flank tora by the bullet 
of my No. 12. 

- Giving her a finishing shot, I halted a moment and con- 
sidered what next todo. Of my two chief objects one was 
now attained: I had killed a fine cow for eating purposes— 
.the bulls at this season being unfit for food. My other object 
was to get a large and perfectly unblemished head to carry 
home as a trophy; such heads, however, were not easily . 


procurable, especially in that particular district, where the ~.. 


ground is so stony that the old bulls more than usually 
destroy their horns when rooting up the earth.* 

All this time bands of buffalo were streaming. past me; 
' the plains were alive as far as the eye could reach. While 
debating whether or not to go on, I suddenly observed in one 
of the passing herds the very specimen J sought for,—‘ an 
exceedingly fine, sleek, round-barrelled bull, not so large 
as some of the patriarchs, but with very long, perfect horns, 
‘and most luxuriant mane and beard.’ Hailing this welcome 
sight, I marked the noble animal for a prey : I remounted in 
haste, and again stirred up old Bichon, who, greatly refreshed 
by the half, went on as gallantly as before, 

Never did bull run more fast and strong. For two miles 
or‘more I stuck to him, but by no means could I get within 
fair shooting-distance. (It was interesting to ride in the 
midst of that vast black mass of buffaloes, for, as I went 
on, the scattered bands seemed more and more to unite, and 
T sometimes found myself moving in a sort of triangled en- 
closure with living walls around me, as the nearer animals 
strove to edge away on either hand, while the ranks were 


* See foot-note, page 96. 


_ 


94 SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN TO CUAP. VII. 


closed in front, and ever-increasing numbers came thundering 
in the rear. As long as Bichon kept his footing there was 
little visk; the buffalo. were thinking only of escape, the 
crowd was not dangerously large or dense, and there was 
plenty of room, for-I was still on-a-gently undulating plain.] 

At last my. bull began to slacken his pace. By what 
“strange instinct did he know that I had, chosen him for my 
own?—the same band was still together, his companions 
were all with him, not one had yet quitted their ranks, yet 
with a sudden movement he sprang out from among them, _ 
and broke away by himself, rushing off at right angles 
through an opening in the crowd, and seeming to gather 
fresh speed as he ran on his separate career. 

It was bué for a while; he abruptly checked himself, 
faced round, and stood at bay. I closed on him, trying for 
a flank shot ;—down went his head, onward he came in full 
charge. Knowing the uselessness of firing at a buffalo’s fore- 
head, I cantered out of his way ; he followed me a few yards, 
. then turned and resumed his course. 

Another mile—again he slackened, breaking into a trot as 
he drew near to the top of a gently sloping rise, and there 
he took up his stand and once more came to bay. I approached 
till but a few yards were between me and him,—then up 
went his tail in sign of battle, down went his head for a 
charge ; but this time I was too quick, “the Bichon had 
slipped round him, and before he could make one step, I sent 
a bullet through his heart He stopped, staggered a a few 
paces, then fell to rise no more. - a 

I got off the panting pony, and took a long look’ ab my 
bull, feasting my eyes on his noble proportions as he lay life- 
‘less on the crisp brown turf of that utterly deserted plain ; 
then remounting, I began to make my way slowly home- 


on 


cwar. vi. CHERRY BUSH, . 95 


wards,—thirsty in -the extreme, after all the heat and dust 
of the gallop, ‘but With no hope of water till most of the 
distance had been retraced. On coming to the cow I had 
previously killed I found Nummé standing beside her: he 
had shot nothing, for Black had proved himself quite un- 
manageable. Preparing to leave the place, he laid his saddle 
on the cow's body to scare away the wolves after our de- 
parture ; then, on my offer to stay with the horses, he set off 
alone in search of carts to carry in the meat or the trophies 
of the two slain buffaloes. 


Growing tired of waiting, I followed in the same direction, _ 


and on presently coming in sight of the old hunter, a most 
amusing scene burst upon my view. He was. stalking a, 
young bull which had remained:in a grassy hollow after the 
departure of the rest of the herd,—-M ‘Kay, or one of the other 
men, having crippled. it by. a shot somewhere. pretty close 
to the shoulder. -Hid in the long herbage, Nummé had 
crept to within thirty yards of the wounded animal, and 
was now proceeding to open against it a sort of masked 
battery. Three times the report resounded, three times I saw. 
the smoke curl upwards, but it always rose froma new place 


as the-wary old man shifted his quarters, while the buffalo, _ 
, mad with rage, leaped round and round, vainly trying to_dis-——~ 


cover the aggressor. Not one of these balls had struck it, for 
Nummé, though reputed a good shot, was just now using the 


-wonderful gun that had been straightened in the cart-wheel 


at Qu’appelle :—the sport seemed likely to be dangerous as 


_ well as tedious, for the buffalo was quite active enough for 
mischief, so I thought it better to ride’in and finish matters ~ 
. with a rifie-bullet...-. - -- ; 


By this time Kline had brought-one of the carts, and 
M‘Kay coming also, the former remained to cut up the cow, 


- 
« 


96 SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN TO CHAP. VIII. 


which was in tolerably fat condition, while the latter rode off 
with me in search of my bull, the cart following soon after- 
wards. We had: much trouble to find this buffalo, for the 
run had been a long one, and towards the end over a rather 

\ broken country, but at last our search proved successful, 
M‘Kay was surprised at the goodness of the horns; such- 
finé ones, he assured me, were -very seldom met with.* 
The head weighed heavily, as we found on lifting it into 
the cart after its separation from the carcase: we left 
that to the wolves and ravens, for it was too coarse and 
tough for human food. 

A thunderstorm came on, but we escaped with a slight 
wetting, being near camp when it began: it only lasted. two 
hours, and then the sun came glowing out with all its former . 
intensity. ~ . 

As J sat after dinner smoking at my tent-door, an old bull 
suddenly made his appearance, on which several of the men 
snatched up their guns and ran out into the plain to take a 
shot at him. I gave my rifle to Toma, who was starting with 
the rest, and the others allowing him first chance, he made 
two excellent shots; putting both bullets ‘splendidly in at 


* The horns measure 13 inches in length, and 8} in circumference at the 
base, and the distance from point to point is 17 inches. Tié points are sharp 
and absolutely perfect, which makes the merit of the head, for stronger (though 
not longer) horns, more or less damaged at the tips, are common enough 
everywhere. In no case, however, are the horns of this variety of the bison 
of yery much greaterssize than those of the specimen referred to, 

In Catlin’s description of the formatjon of the large circular holes known 

as “ wallows,” in which the buffalo? cool themselves in hot weather, he 
tmentions-a-fact ; partly ly explanatory of the broken condition of the horns of the 
older bulls. Into some spot where the earth seems damp, .‘‘ the enormous ; 
bull, lowered upon one. knee, will plunge his horns und at last his head, 
driving up the earth, and soon making an‘ excavation in the ground, into 
which the water filters from amongst. the ‘grass, forming for him, in a few 


CHAP. VIII. - CHERRY BUSH. 97 


140 paces. This checked the bull, and the other men 
tunning’ up poured a volley into it~close at hand ; but, far 
' from dropping, it continued to move on, though crippled with 
a broken foreleg—a thing most disabling to a buffalo, owing 
to the weight of his immense fore quarters. Intending to 
reload, my men now discovered that in their hurry they had 
taken no ammunition. .I saw. what was happening, ‘and 
came out with one of the smooth-bores to assist them. 

Going pretty near the bull, I fired two shots, aiming just 
behind his shoulder; both. went rather high, ‘but either 
should have brought him down ; still he-stood, as firmly as - 
before. Some one then said, “Try him in the flank :”.I 
did not believe it would answer, but-I tried,it, with no 
result, however, but to make the horrid scene still more dis- 
gusting to me. Next time I went quite close to him, and 
aimed very carefully at his heart.’ No other shot was needed ; 
over he rolled, and expired without a struggle or a groan. 

This was an instance of the well-known: fact that when - 
an animal does not immediately drop to a body-shot in the 
regions of the heart, he will bear bullet after bullet without 


moments, a cool and comfortable bath, into which he plunges like a hog in 
his mire. In this delectable laver he throws himself fiat wpon his side, and 
forcing himself violently around . . . he ploughs up the ground by his 
rotary motion, sinking himself deeper and deeper in the ground. . . . It 
is generally the leader of the herd that takes upon him to make this excava- 
tion. 1. having cooled his sides . 2 . he stands in the pool till 
inclination induces him to step out and give place to the next in command 

until the whole herd will pass through in turn ; each one throwing 
“his body around in a similar manner.” —CATLIN, North Am. Ind., vol. i. pp. 
249, 250. ‘ 

It is easy to sce that the larger and stronger bulls must scon destroy the 
sharpness of their horns when heginning these excavations, especially where 
the soil is of a stony nature not merely on the elevated ground put even in 
the damper hollows.’ : CT ~ ON 

H ' , 


a 


98 | SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN TO CHAP. VUIL 


flinching or sinking, until the very brain or heart is pene- 


trated. Perhaps when the first shock fails to prostrate the 


nerves it only serves td dull them, producing insensibility to 
every succeeding shock that does not actually ruin one of the 
vital organs. ° ; 

No fewer than fourteen bullets had nierced this buffalo. 


Toma’s rifle-lalls had both struck him among the front ribs, 


and were lodged close together under the skin of his flank 


far back on the opposite side. They had not touchéd a — 


bone, and were so perfect that I loaded with them again. 
The bull proved to be in capital condition, with plenty of 
fat, which came in usefully, as we were much in want of 
grease at that particular time. Altogether we had killed six 
buffaloes in course of the day: Besides the two killed by 
myself, there were—the bull just mentioned, another stalked 
and shot by M‘Kay after taking Wawpooss home, another _ 
killed by Short, and the young one that Nummévhad per- 
secuted. It would have been easy to:kill & far larger number 
had there.been any object i in doing 80. 

M Kay congratulated me on. shooting such .a good cow, 
besides getting so fine-headed a bull,. at my very first , attempt 
with the great herd, left as I had been entirely to my own 
resources.’ Nevertheless, I was far from pleased with myself, 
and thus did I record my feelings—‘I find myself awkward 


_ in managing a.gua on a galloping horse.” I do not succeed 


well in urging my horse close to a buffalo, and shooting it. 
. oO 


at the gallop. I can kill the™buffaloes I want in my own 


" way, but I wish ‘to -do- it in the best way. Ought I to 


content myself with success in my, own fashion, or should J 
aim at perfection ?—the latter, I think, oe 

Sunday, July ly 1 Tth—We were camped ina hollow beside 

a deep narrow lake about halfa-mile - ong, with low hills 


a very alarming invgsion. We-were in our tents, thinking of 
thing oe disturbance ; the most perfect quiet . 
prevailéd.. In-an ‘instant, without the slightest warning, a 


CHAP. VIII. CHERRY BUSH) 99 


immediately behind us that gradually raised themselves ‘into 
a higher range. At dinner time our camp was surprised by 


storm of noise burst upon‘us,—bells jingled, whips cracked, 
—the tramp of galloping horses resounded close at hand. I° 


leapt up to seize my rifle,—it was not there; I hastened ~ 


out to my men, and found them equally defenceless, for all 


-guns hdd been laid aside on account of the Sunday rest. + 


A strange and unwelcome sight greeted our astonished eyes. 


‘Widely apart, extended in a semicircle which completely 
hemmed us in, a number of armed and’ mostly naked wars _ 


riors were rushing down the slope, urging their horses to 


furious speed with whip and heel. “The Blackfeet!” said 
“ my. men, and we prepared for the worst. The invaders were 
~~ almost upon us, a few yards only lay between us and them, 
‘whe suddenly they checked their spéed; stared -at~us fora . 


moment, then trotted peacefully up with smiling faces, offer- 


‘ing the most friendly greetings, which my men, heartily re- 


ciprocated. ee 
The mystery was soon explained. Our visitors were a 
party of Cree Indians and half-bteeds from Fort Carlton, who 


were camping on the other side of the range, under the - 


leadership of a -hunfer named Tait. -One of. their men, it 


appeared, while going back for a broken cart, had noticed a 


“couple of our horses which had strayed to the top of a‘neigh- 


bouring hill. Supposing us to be Blackfeet, with whom the 
Crees were just g going to war, they planned to surprise us;—and 
so indeed ‘they dia. Each man had his mouth full of bullets, 
ready for action, and most of them were nearly stark naked ; 
everything had been skilfully planned, some of the number 


& 


* 


100 SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN TO omar. vit 


had been expressly told off to drive away our horses, They 


‘would have shown no mercy, I was informed, to a Blackfodt 


party : so at least’ it was said at the time ; Tait, however, 


afterwards assured me that he had ordered his men not to 


. shoot even Blackfeet, unless positively obliged. 


There was clearly something wrong in our arrangements. 


If these Carlton people had been enemies, not one of us 


_ 


could have escaped ; even had they spared our lives they 


‘would have: carried off all our horses. Had they come by _ 


night ‘ve should have been ready for them, two watchers 
being always posted during the-hours of darkness ; after 
sunrise, however, the whole camp slept unguarded, offering a 


too easy chance to any lurking horse-thieves. Some change 

was so evidently required that, much as I disliked interfering ‘, 
with his management of the party, I called M‘Kay to a con-'' 
sultation, and it was settled between us that henceforth ; 


a 
ant 


the horses were to be watched incessantly, not merely by 7 
night but by dayew sn cone ten Se 


‘If only for one reason, Tait’s coming might well be counted 
fortunate. Through him we learned that both at Fort Pitt 
and Fort Edmonton the inhabitants were nearly starving, as 
the buffalo were far distant, and the Blackfeet, afraid of the 


Crees,-with whom they had just begun hostilities, were not’ 
bringing. in meat according to their usyal custom. Had we . 
- gone directly to Fort Pitt, as I-had of late been planning, we 


should have been unable to get supplies to carry us to the 
Rocky Mountains, and our stock of pemmican having run 
short, the journey would almost certainly have come. to an 
untimely conclusion. ; > 


I now decided to go and camp near Tait, hunt buffalo 
in that neighbourhdod, and employ the women who accom- 


panied his party. to dry-a large store of meat for our pur- 
’ . 


a 


CHAP, vi. CHERRY BUSH. ‘ 101 


poses. _ This suited me in janother respect, for it brought us 


nearer, to a hill that was|reporled to abound with grisly 


bears, a few of which I confidently hoped to gecure. 

Our camp was surrounded by dozens of wolves devouring 
the remains of the buiffaloes. “Some one suddenly proposing 
. to give them a fright, we all joined in the fun, and sallied 
forth armed. with whatever came handiest, I with the swingle- 
tree of the waggon, Duncan with a long stick, M‘Kay with a 
log of wood, M'Beatit with the tent-pin mallet ; then spread- 


ing out crescent-ways, we ran. down the bank of the lake, * ” 
trying to force the wolves to meet us, OF else to betake them- 


" selves to the water. [ ‘ 

Away we rush wu: 

M ‘Kay leading ; MjBeath steps into a hole, and measures his 
long length on-the ground ; some fall over him, others keep 
their course, bounding down the slope with shouts and tre- 
-mendous peals of-laughter.. _ woe 

' The wolves managed to slip through our ranks, but they 
had a ver 
"himself b 


ee them with a hatchet, which he hurled 
at such as came within distance : he did no 


execution ‘thal time, however, though a most splendid shot. 
with every sort of missile. He was a wonderfully active . ~ 


‘young fellow, surpassed by few in feats of skill and clever- 
ness.* After Tait left us the men began to play ata certain 


game, in which, the players being blindfolded and playing 


in turn, the object was to be the first to break with an axe a 
marrow-bone laid on’ the grass three paces off, —the breaker 


of the’ bone to get its contents for his- own benefit. Several 


. attempts having been made all round, Short finally proved 


- the successful competitor. He had ‘eunningly taken off his 


_ moccasins, then groped about with his feet till he found a tuft 


me 


3 


der the clear moonlight, the pace terrific, - 


narrow escape. AJ night long Short amused - 


. eat . 
102 SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN TO ‘oiiar. vm. 


of grass that he knew to be near ‘the marrow-boiie, thus dis- ~ 
covering the right direction for ‘the winning effort. 

This morning M‘Kay came upon’a sleeping wolf, and hit'it 
$0 violently on the ribs with a heavy stone, that the wiretellpd 
creature rolled over as af, dgad, and blood spurted from its - 
jaws. It summoned u dp BRR ngth, howevér, to scramble to its 
fect, and ran off in*time to escape a second visitation. 

July 18th.—The buffaloes were still all round us in scat- 
tered bands, ‘solafter breakfast I shouldered my rifle, and 
walked a mile or two alone into the prairie in hopes’of shoot- 
ing another fat cow. The only-herd I could at all approach 

_was feeding in the open plain, but a slight undulation en- 
abled me to get within 150 yards; nearer I could not go, 
being already just on the edge of the wind. The cows un- 

- luckily were at the farther side, a good fifty paces, beyond 
the bulls ; -still I. thought it possible to kill one, but before I 
had got fait aim they took the alarm and began to move off, 
upon which I rather too hastily fired both ‘barrels at the 

" slowly-retreating animals. There was no apparent result ; 

and then -I found myself in a difficulty, for the old bulls, 
instead of moving off too; remained on the spot, bellowing, 
pawing the ground, and looking fiercely about them. I could 
not load while stretched flat on the turf; if I raised myself 
in the least, I came linto view; if 1 lay still, I was equally 
sure to be discovered, ‘owing to ashift in the wind, which now 
blew towards them. iAfter a moment’s thought I resolved to 
load at all hazards ; ‘so, laying everything ready, I raised 
myself and loaded as quickly as possible. The buffaloes 
must have seen me, but none of them showed symptoms of 
charging, and, as “nothing more could be done with the cows, 

I was glad to leave the bulls without further disturbance. 

They were savage and dangerous at that season, but, from | 
R Sr, 


_ 


CHAP, VIII. CHERRY BUSH. 103 


‘what I afterwards heard, I doubt if they ever attack unless 
very closely approached or driven to bay.* 

While coming home I saw an old wolf a long way off and 
saluted him with both barrels. One bullet passed close to 
his tail, if it did not actually graze it, evidently to his great 
astonishment, for he doubtless thought himself safe at such a 
distance, having no experience of guns that were dangerous 
at two or three hundred yards. 

On my return we struck tents and made a move for Tait’s 
encampment, which was situated at a place called Cherry 
Bush, nine or ten gniles away towards the other side of the 
range. As we“marched over a shoulder of these hills, —the 
“ Roastipg’Hills” by name,—we passed by many bands of 
buffaléy but would not disturb them for fear-of spoiling Tait’s 

_ hunting arrangements. . 

A badger was foolish enough to show itself j in the open 
plain: as a matter of course, all the men immediately pur- 
sued it, Short, as usual, among the foremost, leaping round 
and round, pelting it with pieces of dry buffalo dung, and 
out of some half-dozen shots never once failing to hit its 
pointed nose. Kline at last ran in and slew the badger with 
a long stick,—a needless act unfortunately, for the poor harm- 
less animal proved to be, much too thin for eating. 

' Two or three cows then came past. As they. wetle so 
close that we could not interfere with Tait by following 
them, M‘Kay started to ran them on Black, whom he hap- 
pened to be riding ; 1 started also, though only mounted on 
‘Morgan, who was not then reckoned among our buffalo-run- 


* Jn the rutting season the males fight against each other with great 
fury, and at that period it is very dangerous to approach them. The bison is, 
however, in general, a shy animal, and takes to flight instantly on winding an 
enemy... . It js dangerous for the hunter to show himself after having 


wounded one.""—RicHaRpson, Faun. Bor.-Am., vol. i. p. 291, 


~ ORS 


rn. 


104 SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN TO OHAP. VII. 


ners. Suddenly Black’s girthing got unloosed, and the saddle 
slipping back, he began to kick so violently that M‘Kay was 
obliged to jump off, without delay. On seeing this I halted, 
knowing that Black would go nearly mad if another horse 
“passed him, so the cows went away unmolested. 

This happened near Tait’s camp. Meanwhile a half-breed, 
who had a wonderful power—magical, some thought it— 
of guiding buffalo in any direction that he pleased, was driv- 
ing, or rather leading, a great band of bulls and cows to the 
very tents, and the ruiners had just begun to set out in 
pursuib. — 

On our arrival at Cherry Bush, we camped upon a sandy 
hillock near a small swampy pool, about a quarter of a mile 
from the Carlton encampment. Several of the hunters pre- 
sently came to see us. Tait himself paid me a special visit, 
accompanied by his eldest daughter, a very pretty child of 
some six years old,—a charming little girl, whose bright black 
eyes and pleasant smiles seemed to bring sunbeams with them 
to my solitary tent. 

After dinner a large band of buffalo appeared from over 

_ the bill ‘We prepared to run them. One of the Indians, a 
very bold intelligent young man named Napésskes, asked 
leave to ride Black, which, being arranged, I set off with him’ 
myself, riding the Bichon, as was now my ordinary custom. 

For half-an-hour we had to wait in a hollow till the signal 
was given, then we rushed from our concealment. Black 
went right to the front, and Bichon kept well with him so ~ 

‘far, but the old. pony was singularly restive and excited all 
the while, and fora minute or two I could scarcely get him 
to close. When at length alongside, I found great difficulty 
in making out the cows, as there were very few to be seen 
and it was hard to distinguish them from the young bulls. 


CHAP. VIII. CHERRY BUSH*. 105 


As for bulls, one might have shot them right and left by dozens. 
At last I got a chance at a cow, But missed her ;—no one, till 
he tries it, can fancy how hard it is to shoot a galloping 
buffalo from a galloping horse. 

The buffaloes -were now running round me in every 
quarter, the herd for the most part broken into small lots 
separated by trifling intervals-from one another; and, having 
after some trouble reloaded. without stopping the pony, I set 
myself to follow a mixed band of cows and bulls, of various 
ages. As I came opposite Tait’s camp I met the Indian who 
had borrowed Black, he laughingly held up two fingers to 

‘show that he had killed a.pair of: cows. He was very clever 
at signs. We had previously passed a peculiar-looking skull 
with slight and much-curved horns, placed by, itself on the 
ground, and no sooner did I notice it, than’ he made me 
understand that this was not the head of a bull, but of an ox 
—a variety of somewhat rare occurrence ; that he shot it 
himself; and that it had stood half as high again as a male 
of the ordinary description. 

Scarce slackening speed while passing Napesskes I 
continued to urge on the Bichon, but his hardest efforts 
failed to place me alongside the cows. I then tried two 
long shots ; both were fruitless ; so I drew rein a little, and 
settled my pony into a steady gallop, resolved to follow to 
the death. Aa 

‘ How they did run! After two miles (due west) Bichon 
began to gain a little on them ; I urged him, and he nearly 
closed. JI. fired at a fine cow; she staggered; but went on, 
the blood pouring from a wound high in her shoulder. The 
shock seemed to sicken her, she slackened; I pressed on to 
give her the other barrel; Bichon lengthened his stride, we 
went sailing down a gently sloping hill. We got close to the 


106 | SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN TO _: omar. vim. 


cow. I leant forward .to give her the finisher,—crash! down 
came Bichon on ‘the top of his head. 

‘My gun flew yards aways I shot through the air and fell 
in front of the horse ; “he rolléd over and. over, and then came 


‘“yight upon me in such a manner that my left leg, spur wpper- 
‘most, was pinned under him, and my head lay between his 


hind and fore feet. I expected instant death; but the good 
God protetted me, and after a minute of terrible suspense I 
got clear of the horse’s hoofs, and jumped up in time to catch 
his bridle as he rose. Had he been a violent beast like Black, 
I must have been killed. As it was, no injury was done to 
either, man, gun, or horse, except that my elbow got a 
trifling cut. , 


~ 


° ap FE 


SKULL OF A BUFFALO OX, 


‘ Leaping on Bichon’s back, I went on after the cow, but 


“another mile convinced me I could not catch her, as she was 


' 


' going. as fast as the others, and had gained so long a start. 


Her well-grown calf was running at her side, as it had done 
the Whole time. . A wolf was following close behind her, 
smelling her blood and anticipating a prey, which he is not 
likely to get, for the chances are she will recover. 


a 


a 


___. CHERRY BUSH. | _ --------- 107" 


- cttab, vit. - 
‘T then turned towards camp, and the provéking Bichon, 
. who had gone very soberly since his fall, began to pull hard 
and neigh. It was fortunate that he was so fond of his home, 
for I had great doubts about the position of the camp, and he 
encouraged me~by always pulling in what I also thought to 
be the right direction. He was not wrong. On getting to a 
knoll I had been making for, Tait’s camp appeared exactly in 
front, and I was soon at my own tent-door.’ 


CHAPTER IX. 
. -- "gy 
CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL, ‘FORT CARLTON. 
JULY 19th—We busied ourselves, this excessively hot 
morning, in making prephrations for a hunt on the range 
of hills where grisly bears were reported to be so numerous. 
I determined to take oiily’some of my men, as there was 
full, employment for the’ rest of the party, during the short 
time we were likely top be. absent, in .killing buffalo to 
increase our mi SC nty store of dried provisions. 

It was about I o’clock When wwe set out. The Bichon 
carried me as usual, Nummé rode- Nez- blanc, Duncan was 
‘mounted on the Gris. /Napesskes, that clever good-looking 
Indian, accompanied us, in the - “capacity: ‘of gtiide. By birth 
he was really of French half- breed origi, but having always 
lived with the Indians he completely resenibled them in his 
looks and habits, and nobody much remembered about his Euro- 
pean blood. . To honour the occasion he had arrayed himself 
in a new coat,—no less than a. superfine blue cloth surtout, 
with gilt buttons, and a high velvet collar of an anciently 
fashionable cut ; but instead of trowsers he wore leather leg- 
gings of the Indian pattern, which reached but a certain way up 
his limbs, and when the wind blew back his coat skirts there 
was a strange exhibition .of rich mahogany-colqured skin. 
His long, straight, black hair was twisted into a quantity of 
tails bound round with coils of brass wire. He it was that 


+ 


cuar. 1x. CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL, FORT CARLTON, 109 - 


the day before had borrowed Black for a.run with the Buffalo; & 
but for this journey he was mounted on quiet little Spot, as 
-different a sort of steed as one could well imagine, Kline 
completed the party, driving a lightly-laden cart drawn by 
the horse we brought from the White Horse Plains—Blond, 
alias M‘Gillis, the handsome and still’ fat chestnut with the 
silky flowing mane and tail. 

For three miles our road ran due west over the country ‘ 
I had crossed in my latest run ; after that we partly altered 
our course and tended more:in.a southerly direction. 

A cabree appeared onthe rise of a little hill, and came | 
forward to stare at us; I dismounted, and gave him a couple 
of shots, killing him with the second at 120 yards. He was 
a three-year-old male with but a poor head, not having yet 
attained to his full growth. ; 

Before we had gone much farther the country entirely 
changed in its aspect; instead of half-dry salt swamps, with 
here-and theré’ a sandy knoll, we now came to a wide arid 
prairie, level in character. but rising occasionally into hills of 

' trifling elevation. Far as the eye could reach these plains 
were covered with troops of buffalo, thousands and thou- 
sands were constantly in sight. I might have shot plenty 


of old bulls, but it would have been mere-cruel butcherys“and -- - 


the cows, as usual, were very hard to approach. I did not 
wish to over-tire Bichon by running him, and when one at- 
tempts an open advance on foot—concealment on such 
ground being impossible—the buffalo always keep sheering 
off as soon as you get within 200 yards of the nearest. If 
you follow, they merely repeat the move, and always manage 
to preserve the same distance. I dismounted, and tried 
one or two long shots at cows, but without, any perceptible 
result. 


! 
als 
, 


110 _ - CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL," — otiar. ix. 


After perlaps twenty miles’ travelling under the éxcessive 
_ heat of the sun, we at length beheld, at no great distance be- 
fore us, our destined camping-place—the Bad Hill. This, 
eniinous name relates to some great misfortune that there! 
, befell the Crees_or Assiniboines, but the tradition is lost, 
at any rate was unknown to my people. It is*a range of 
hills, or rather one continuous hill, extending:about ten miles 
in length ; in height it does not exceed a few ‘hundred feet, 
. and its outline is plain and rounded ; it is scored by many 
deep ravines, for the most part overgrown with «poplars and: 
thick brushwood, which form a favourite haunt of the grisly 
bear. ms 

A fatal accident happened at this place about a year be- 
fore my visit. Two Indians, while gathering berries on the 
hill, were attacked by a grisly who was lying concealed 
among the bushes. One man he instantly knocked down, 
then seized the other and kilked him : meanwhile the first 
succeeded in making his escape, The Indians are afraid to 
stop in one particular glen, which is very much frequented 
by- these savage bears ; we, however, had no hesitation about . 
camping there, as it’ had the advantage of a rentarkably fine 
spring of water. 

Besides the risk of lurking grislies, which did not much 
trouble us, there was the far more serious risk of Blackfoot 
war-parties, for this hill lay right in,their accustomed path. 
If they had come— Napesskes’s neat, boat-shaped skull 
would have been shorn of its covering, the Crees and Black- 
feet being now at war; our horses, too, would have been 
' taken—if nothing worse’ 

Between us and the Bad IIill, as it first appeared in view, 
stretched a flat valley of fine level prairie land, to which we 
descended along a gentle ‘slope, and after two or three miles’ 


CHAN. 1X, FORT CARLTON, oui 


ue 


tr avelling arrived at the stream which flows beneath the hill— 
the, Eagle Creek again, at that point not far from where it 
takes j ifs Tisé- - The water ; jwas.-brackish, just as it was in the 
lower part of its-course, ‘We argssed” it easily, and’ camped 
about 8PM. in the woody saving y which has been already 
mentioned. - ~ ° “2: as 
July 20th. — Rising: tsibne" aay Dea I set out with 
Nummé ‘and’ _Napesskes to lock for bears. “We rode in an 
easterly direction, and passed through several . glens ‘Without 
seeing any living” creature, until In one deep narrow dell, we 
came suddenly upon a small female deer, —a tgoe” my people 
‘called it. She slowly approached us, eyeing us with the pret- 
tiest timidly inquisitive glances, till on getting very close her 
keen nostrils told her a truer tale than her eyes had skill for, 
and away she bounded and hid herself in the-leafy shades. 
We had nearly reached the farthest ravine towards the 
hill’s north-eastern extremity, when we at last ‘beheld some 
-of the objects of our search: a large female grisly bear and 
her cub walking about in the open, on high bare ground, 
‘not far from the upper part of a dense-growing thicket of 
brushwood. We immediately gave chase to cut them off 
‘from the covert: they were too quick for us, arid made good - 
their retreat into its deep recesses long before our arrival 
within riflerange. On this Nummé and I dismounted, and 
- crossing the little stream that ran along the bottom of the 
glen, now immediately beneath us, we began to ascend the 
opposite bank near the thicket where the bears were shelter- 
ing. Suddenly Nummé called out—Shoot !| and'on Jooking 
round I saw the large bear sitting up on its haunches, full in 
view, but it was not less than 150 yards from the place where, 
we stood. The light was indifferent, and the large rifle in my 
hand was quite unfamiliar to me, having only once been tried 


\ 


112 CHERRY BUSH, ‘THE BAD HILL, GHAP. I 


at all, and never at long range,—I would not attempt the 
shot at such a distance ; meanwhile the grisly turned back 
into the bush and began to cross the ravine. 


We returned to the side we had come from, and rejoined 


Napesskes, who had posted himself at the edge of a bank 
that commanded a clear view for some way down the descent. 
Presently a buffale-bull ¢ame rushing out from below, and 
Napesskes said that he saw the bear strike it as it passed. 
A minute or two afterwards appeared the bear itself. It 


stopped on a little knoll right below us and about 100 yards 


off, reared itself on its hind legs, and swayed slowly froin’s side 
to side, staring at us and trying to get our wind. Quickly 
putting aside the heavy rifle, I took my favourite Purdey, 
and fired. The first shot missed ; the bear turned itself half 
round ; before it got its forefeet to the earth I struck it hard 
and fair with the second shot. It nearly fell over, then partly 


recovered : we expected it to charge, but with no attempt to ~ 


do So, it rushed away into thg thickest of the bushes. 
At that moment Nummé ‘(who ‘had gone to the opposite 
side) saw a bear running rapidly past, and fired both barrels 


of my No. 12 at it, hitting it, a’ he rather thought, with one. 


ball. We rode across and joined him. 

‘We were now on a steep bank, with thick underwood 
beneath us, and could see the bushes moving to and fro as 
the wounded bear writhed and raged in his pain; we could 
also hear its heavy panting, but the beast itself was quite 
concealed. \ Presently we heard it splashing in the water just 
below ; then it lay still, and neither shots nor stones could 
move it. 

‘We went down close: to the thicket where it was, and 
watched for a long time. Nummé said that it was lying hid, 


~ crouching in readiness to clutch any one who came within 


~_ 


. 


CHAP. IX. -FORT CARLTON. , 113 


4 


reach, and if (as he supposed) it was a female with a cub, it 


‘would be doubly savage and dangerous. He assured me it 


woild not do to go into the bush, which, besides being twice 
as high as 4 man, was as dense as a common thorn hedge. I 
confess I should have been sorry to go in, but had the hunters 
advised doing so, of course I should have gone. Napesskes after- 
wards said that he would have been willing, but that Nummé 
objected. As the former speaks nothing but Cree, and made 
no signs, I could not say what might have been the extent 
of his readiness. To go in appeared to me sheer madness. 

_ ‘We at length determined to leave the place, and return in 
the evening, or next morning, by which time the bear would 
be dead, or at any rate stiff from its wound ; so we rode back 
to camp and breakfasted. 

‘ Afterwards we rode along the whole o Tength of the hill, 
exploring all the valleys, but saw nothing except the small 
deer which somewhat answer to our “roe.” They-aré called 
“ Black-tailed Cabrees.” _by_the-Indians, bie improperly, for 
the cabree is an antelope, and does not shed its horns as this 
deer does:* 

‘There was an extensive view from the top of the hill, 
though the day unfortunately was, not very clear. The Bad 
Hill faces to the north-west. Running south-west is the long 
range called the Roasting Hill, near which Tait was camped. 
Between the“vestern extremities of these ranges there lies a 
small lake, out of which flows the Eagle Creek. A long | 
way to the south-east is’ a‘larger piece of water called the 


‘Little “Devil’s Lake. This Bad Hill is the farthest point 


to which the Crees and Stonies [Assiniboines] ever come, as 


* Cervus macrotis——The Black-tailed Deer, or Mule Deer, or Jumping Deer 
. called by the Canadian voyageurs ‘‘ chevrewil.”—Ricnanvson, Faun. 


Bor.-Am., vol..i. p. 254, 


I 


ery 


. a ’ _ 
ll4 CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL, CHAD, Ix, 


ao 
there is no wood for an immense distance beyond it, when 
journeying in’ the Blackfoot direction. Captain Blakiston 
hunted over. the neighbouring plains, but it is believed that 
no European (not a resident in the country) has been on 
the hill but myself. Arrowsmith’s map [1859] is utterly 
wrong hereabouts. It places Eagle Hill Creek about forty 
miles north-west from its real position’ * 

Returning in the evening we perceived a few buffalo 
feeding on a strip of rugged broken ground that stretched 
along the foot of the hill and formed an intermediate belt 
between the higher and lower levels. I went towards them 
alone, and had no difficulty in making my stalk, crawling 
under cover of a little rocky knoll till I got within range of 
the cows that seemed to be in fairest order. I fired at a 
rather good one, and hit her low on the flank ; at that in- 
stant another shot struck her from the opposite side, the 
two reports almost mingling in one. ‘It was Napesskes, 
who having gone forward in search: of buffalo some while 
before, had, by a strange coincidence, stalked and shot at the 


same cow that I-was stalking, neither of us having the least , 


idea as to his fellow-hunter’s proceedings. 
The wounded cow staggered almost to falling; she had 
strength, however, to move heavily on. Naposskes went in 


ae ~- 


— I am n inclined to think that the Eagle Hill Creek of Arrowsmith’ ‘3 map 
is a totally different stream from that referred to above, which I suspect was 
erroneously designated by Nummé (whose ‘acqnaintance with the district was 
scanty enough)—unless, indeed, the stream possesses more names than one, 
as not unfrequently happens. Finding myself unable to-lay down the locali- 
ties in this neighbourhood ‘in a manner correspondent with the description in 
my journal, I fear that some erro must exist among the original notes them- 
sely es,—-through aslip of the pen, or, more probably, from misinformation. 
Nevertheless, I offer the particulars as they stand, hoping to draw the atten- 
tion of future travellers to the subject. 


; or 
_ CHAP. IX. FORT CARLTON. 115 


pursuit, and I was just in time to get a shot at another cow 
while she was in the act of disappearing over the knoll, and 
my bullet raked her from stern to stem. She stopped, crawled 
on a few yards, then Nummé finished her. Napesskes mean- 
while was following the wounded cow down into the plain, 

and as soon aa.she arrived there a bull came forward to pro- 
tect her, keeping constantly at her side, and putting himself 
always between" her and danger’s way. “For a good while 
he would not be driven off, and Napesskes, with laudable 
humanity, refrained from killing him; at length, however, 
the skilful hunter managed to scare him away, and then very 
easily secured his companion. - We found her to be tolerably 
fat,—a fortunate circumstance for us, for our ‘provisions were 
nearly all expended. - - 

‘It is‘ very cool at night at our elevated camp, though 
the days are so hot ; and this is a comfort, as the cold keeps . 
the mosquitoes down,— indeed I am almost beginning to 
forget the existence of the plagues. This respite, and the 
good spring water, have made me feel much better than for 
some time past. There is great ‘scarcity of pure water, in 
the central country. From Crow-wing to Fort Ellice we did 
not see a single spring. There isa fine, though small, running 
stream flowing into the Qu’ appelle near where we crossed,’ 
but from that place to this we have found nothing at: all 
resembling it, Our drink has been either swamp water, bad 
tasted and full of insects, or else muddy river water. Wild 
raspberries, strawberries, and gooseberries, grow abundantly _ 
on the Bad Hill’ oan f 

July 21st—Again I rose at daybreak, and set out in search 
of the wounded bear. All the party.went with me except 
Kline, who was to follow us with the cart, when he had 
finished packing up the tent and the rest of the baggage. On 


a 


116 CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL,. CHAP. IX. 


reaching the ravine where we expected ‘to find the grisly, 
Nummé, Duncan, and I, crossed over to the place where it 
had Jast been moving among the bushes, while Napesskes 
stopped on ‘the bank I had shot from, to report if anything 
broke otit that way. Leaving Duncan with the horses, lest 
they should take alarm through some glimpse of the lurking 
enemy, Nummé and I then entered the thicket on our knees, 
creeping along side by side, our weapons on full cock,—I car- 
rying the large Dickson rifle, he bringing forward one of my 
twelve-bore Purdey guns. 
‘The bushes seeméd almost impenetrably thick, but after 
crawling through the outer brush we found a sort of path 
about two yards wide. It led to a small pool of water over- 
arched with thick brushwood, and beside it we saw the grisly 
bear lying dead on its back, with its legs outstretched and 
its bowels protruding from a hole in the side of its belly. 
‘Nummé, who, as yet, had supposed it to be a female, 
now held up his hands in surprise. “ C’est un taureau!” he 
exclaimed ; and sure enough it was, " being a male not quite 
full grown, "about three years old. The tracks of a cub were 
stamped in the mud all round, most singularly like a child’s 
footmarks. This brought such thoughts to my mind that I 
felt almost glad the little bear and its mother had escaped. 
She had probably slipped away in the bush, while the male| 
already there, showed himself and got shot. \ 
‘ At first, on seeing the large wound in. the bear's side, 1| 
thought Nummé must have hit it with the twelve-bore, but \ 
we soon discovered the small round hole where my conical 
ball had entered, on the right side above ‘the hip, spreading 
in its passage through the animal’s body so as to tear a great 
ragged hole.on the opposite side) Nummé kept all along . 
assuring me that the shot could not have been his, but I 


* 


CHAP, IX. FORT CARLTON. 117 


thought he might be saying this from mere politeness. Now, 
- however, there could be no mistake, for though a small bullet 
may make a large hole, a large bullet cannot make a small 
one. 

‘We skinned the bear and took his skull* No object 
could be more appallingly hideous than a fresh-skinned bear. 
He is like a monstrous mis-shapen man, of giant strength 
and devilish ferocity,—a true Hans of Iceland. His head 
especially, all raw and grinning, is “a.thing to dream of, not 
to tell”’ . oe 

Close by the carcase grew a profusion of wild mint, the 
very scent of which seemed to draw ugliness from its disgust- 
ing neighbourhood. I often used to put mint leaves into my 
tea to correct the taste of the foul swamp-water ; I never did 
so again. “From the eater came forth meat, from the strong 
came sweetness,” was no true proverb for me. 

The skinning operations well over, we breakfasted. Then, 
having been joined by Kline, with his cart; we set out on our 
return to Cherry Bush. As we were travelling along, we 
came upon a new-born buffalo calf: we merely looked at it 
and went our way, leaving it quietly crouching in the grass. 
The mother cow, however, seeing us so near its resting-place, 
came running from the herd, and full of the notion that her 
little one was being carried off, the poor foolish creature 
never went to see if it were still where she had hidden it, 
but kept following on and on, watching all our movements 
with an ait of most pitiable anxiety. In vain we tried to 
drive her back, she would not be driven, she seemed incap- 
, able of fear ; but after a long time, she quitted us of her own 


* Both skin and skull were brought safely to this country. The former 
measutes 5 feet 8 inches in its present rather dried condition. Some large old 
grislies reach 8 feet, or even 9 feet, in length. 


118 CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL, | cmap. ix. 


accord, and slowly retraced her steps: we hoped that she 

found the little calf alive and safe and well, but most pro- 

bably the wolves had devoured-it while she was far away. 
The buffalo were trooping all over the plains, not in dense 


enormous herds, but broken into innumerable small strag- 


gling bands. I was more than ever struck with the likeness ©. 


of the old bulls to lions, as we saw them standing apart on 
the low ridges and sandy knolls, eyeing us from afar with an 
air of savage watchfulness,—each neck crested with a luxu- 
riant mane, swelled into greater largeness by the hump be- 
neath it, each short, tufted tail held straight out from the 
body in bold and lion-like defiance. In one scattered herd 
T noticed an animal towering far above the rest ; it was one 
of those glossy, flat-sided, long-legeed oxen already spoken of. 
They fall into this condition in calf-hood, either from the 
attacks of wolves, or from measures taken by the Indians. 
As these cattle are rare, besides being the best for meat, I 
began to run him, wishing to secure a fine Specimen; how- 
ever, I soon gave him up, for he had so long a start and 


‘went so well that I could not hope to overtake him without 


the risk of losing my-people, and perhaps falling among hos- 
tile war-parties. When nearer home I ran a cow, and shot 
her very easily ; she was poor and Jean, which accounted 
for her bad running, so we only took her tongue. 


About 2 o’clock we reached Cherry Bush. Just as dinner: 


PX 


was over, a few bulls rushed past close by the tents, and | 


some being wanted at the time, we all turned out to shoot 
them. TI fired at a young bull galloping hard, about 200 


yards off, and broke his foreleg with the Purdey rifle; I- 


then chased him Dickson in hand; blazing at him as I ran 
in dreadfully out of breath, and by chance hitting him in 


the ribs. It was a mere graze, and: he would have escaped, , 


CHAP. IX, FORT CARLTON. 119 


for I had no ammunition with me, but M‘Kay and Kline 
coming up at the moment followed. on in pursuit, and the: 
former stopped him with a well-planted bullet.’ 

_ It was lucky that the bear was dead when Nummé and I 
crawled up to him, for, on shooting off the Dickson rifle, both 
barrels hung fire badly, having been too long loaded, and 
much shaken on the saddle. The check would have thrown 
out my aim at the critical moment, and we should have been 
at the mercy of the grisly, who, in such a thicket, and at 
such close quarters, would have killed us both, unless the 
old hunter had shot a good deal better than he had lately 
made a habit of doing. 

I was vexed to find that my absence had lost me the 
chance of a larger bear.than the one I had just brought 
home. It came prowling about the hunter's camp | the very 
day we started for the Bad Hill, and Tait, while siding aloney 
discovered it in a swamp, and ran it id bay i in’ a small-plece 
of water, where he shot it without difficulty. was a full- 
grown male, and very thin. : 

M‘Kay, by my permission, had been giving Morgan atrial 


with the buffalo. He found my gallant pony both fast and - 


fearless, and as good as any trained runner, and, succeeded ift 
shooting five cows off his back in a-single race. M‘Beath 
shot two eff Wawpooss (who was now himself again), and shot 
the same number off La Framboise, —a animal who went 
well while he lasted, but _very soon shut up. We were thus 
plentifully supplied with meat, which the Carlton women 
were engaged in drying for us. 

[During our stay my people made’ a set of cart harness in 
a very singular manner. They carved it out in its proper 
shape on the very body of a bull as he lay back upwards, 
and then lifted it up complete in a single piece. The sun 


a 
‘. 


120 CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL, CHAP. 1X, 


quickly dried the raw hide, and it turned into the toughest 
of leather. ‘They also made some of the long lines that are 
used for so many purposes. These they carved out in the 
same fashion from the hind quarters of a bull, ‘by forming a 
series of spirally-enlarging circular cuts, passing the knife under 
them, and lifting off the-hide exactly like the skin of a well- 
peeled apple or orange. The ends were then attached to two 
stakes, between which the strip being tightly stretched, it soon 
became a straight and perfect line. When running buffalo, 
the hunter generally carries a line of this sort coiled up and 
tucked under his belt, one end being fastened to the horse’s 
head. ‘Should a fall take place, as it frequently does when 
badger-holes are numerous, the line uncoils itself from the 
rider’s belt as he is quitting the saddle, and trails upon the 
eround, making it easier-for him fo recover his horse.] 


BUPFALO-FHIDE LINE, 


July 22d—The hunters were Starting to run buffalo : so 
Thad Morgan saddleg, and went with them. The brave little 
horse dashed to the front, perfectly obedient, full of life’ and 
spirit. Isingled out the leading band of cows and tried hard 
to close for a shot, but it was long ere I could approach them, ° 
though the pony was straining every nerve and going quite 


Ee , 


CUAP, 1X. FORT CARLTON. 121 


magnificently. After two miles of it they showed signs of | 
failing, and the poorer ones stopped. I cheered on little 
Morgan and urged him to his utmost-;-he- made new efforts, 
dashed forward, and brought me near one of the finest, one of 
a sleek pair that kept well before the rest of the band. My 
wrist was tired from holding a heavy five-chambered carbine, 
—I missed the first shot, but, closing with the cow again, 
I gave her a second; it told hard on her and she nearly 
stopped. : 

Looking on her as safe, I followed her companion, and ran 
her for some distance ; but finding the chase likely to be too 
long, I returned to the wounded one I had left behind. 

She had partly recovered, and galloped off in away that . 
surprised me, however I soon overtook her ; she turned short 
yound, and came to bay beside a pool of water among the 
sand-hills, I stopped my pony. The cow instantly made a 
slow but vicious charge, then resumed her former position, 
and this mdncuvre she repeated whenever I drew up in 
hopes to get a steady shot :—there she stood, her head inces- 
santly towards me, her eyes glowing with rage.* 

Again and again I tried to pass round her, but she always’ 
baffled me by quickly revolving in her place, sometimes’ trot- 
ting forward a few steps as if intending to charge ; mean- 
while my beautiful pony, brave as a lion, seemed ready to 


- rush against her very horns, pressing towards her even, so 


that I was obliged to restrain his ardour. 
But the end came at last. Taking a moment when the 
buffalo lowered her head, I gave her a shot somewhere in the 
* Why is it, among all sorts of animals, that when brought to bay some 
individual ones express such more than common fury in their eyes? Hers 
were like emerald furnaces: no buil ev! ver looked sa fierce as she did. Of the 


many stags I have shot, I remember but two that glared with this remarkable 
expression of intense, everlasting hatred. 


122 CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL, CHAP. 1x, 
neck or chest. The sudden stroke confused her, she half- 
turned, and offered me a fairer chance; then I shot her 
through the heart, and the gallant cow fell dead, with her 
face still to the foe. 

Tying my neck handkerchief to her horns to scare the 
wolves away, I returned for a cart, and M‘Kay and Short 
getting into it, we went off together to fetch her home. Mor- 
gan had done enough, so I took Vermont instead. -He-was 
‘as idiotical as usual,’ going out reluctantly but pulling all 
the way back, hurting my hands most cruelly by this perverse 
conduct, for they were blistered from buffalo-running with- 
out gloves under a scorching summer sun. 

After some search we found the cow. She was surrounded 
with wolves, but none of them had dared to brave the terrors of 
my black and white handkerchief, While the cutting-up pro- 
ceeded, I hid myself in a sand hollow close by, and fired at 
several of these greedy sneaking thieves#Milling one—a large 
female; and on the way home I struck another.—‘ The 
wolves are detestable wretches, but do more good than harm 
to man, seldom attacking horses or human beings, and de- 
vouring carcases and offal that would breed a pestilence if 
left to rot.’* It is their habit to hang round the buffalo herds, 
preying on any young or sickly animals that fall into their - 
clutches, but carefully shunning the horns of the strong old 
bulls. A young calf separated from its mother stands but a 
poor chance. That very day we saw a tolerably large ond. 7 
: ~“¥phese wolves were chiefly of the smaller ‘kind—Cants latrans—the 
Prairie Wolf. Cased Wolves—Hudson's Bay Co. Lists. Afeestch-chaggoncesh 
—Cree Indians. (The length of these wolves is about three feet; that of the 
large wolves—Canis lupus,—upwards of four feet.) Ricuanpson, Faun. 
Bor.-Am., vol. i. pp. 73, 74. The great wolf is said to be very good eating 


(like the dog, which is a favourite Indian food), but the smaller wolf is con- 
sidered uneatable. . ° a 


“a 


CHAP. IX. FORT CARLTON. , 123 


pursued by. a band of wolves ina string of: a quarter of a mile, 
each following at a few yards’ interval behind the-other. The 
foremost, considerably in advance, was close upon the calf, 
which was bleeding at the nose and throat ;—another minute 
would have settled its destiny, but M‘Kay galloped up and 
ovértook the wolf, too-busy to notice him, and shot it in the 
haunch, saving the poor calf at any rate for a time. If it 
failed to find its mother the reprieve must have been short 
enough. , 

‘Last night the wolves and the innumerable dogs at Tait’s 
camp made noise enough to wake the dead. The dogs were 


disgusting with their horrible yelp and yowl, but I confess to _ 


a liking for the wild, melancholy, and almost musical notes 
of the wolf. Buffalo bulls, roaming about unscared by our 
tents, were bellowing around us all the while. [The sound is 
rather deep than loud]; I have heard louder roaring from 
stags in many a Scottish deer-forest. The bulls were beginning 
' their rutting season. Pairs might everywhere be seen outside 
the herds, consisting of a cow and an attendant bull who had 
taken her: away from the rest; but this I believe was rather 
exceptional, the sexes generally remaining together in large 
bands as usual.’ 
, _ ‘I find buffalo meat tolerably good, but not nearly equal 
to fine beef. It is better in autumn they say, so I suspend 
my judgment. Thus runs my journal, but I believe I 
~--was--mistaken- in that depreciatory- opinion: In fact; we- 
never kept the meat long enough, being obliged by the 
-heat and the flies to use it the day it was killed, or soon 
after, which prevented it from having a fair chance to become 
tender. 
One of the women brought in the bear-skin, very nicely 
« prepared. It looked remarkably well, but I confidently ex- 


~ 


124 CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL, CHAP. IX. 


pected to get much larger specimens of the grisly before my 
journey was completed. 

These Indian women had been most servicéable to us in 
dressing skins and heads, drying meat, and mending or 
making clothes ; so, when adding a small present to the mere 
payment for their work, I was glad to find among my stores 
a parcel of beads exactly to their taste. It amused me to see 
that fashion reigned here as imperiously as in more civilised 
lands ; some fine, richly-coloured, oval beads, the size of 
pigeon’s eggs, which I considered my best, and which a year 
or two before would have been generally admired, were des- 
pised and. out of date, while the little trashy white. ones, no 
bigger than a pin’s head, were highly appreciated. Perhaps 
the sinall beads were valued as useful for embroidery, in which 
the Indian and half-breed women excel; while the larger 
ones, only serving for necklaces and ornaments, had come to 
be thought too barbaric by those who lived at the Forts. 

_ ‘In course of the afternoon the men employed themselves 
in feats of strength and skill. MKay seemed strongest in 
the arm. Kline showed himself both strong and active. 
Among other performances, he rolled a stick from under 
him, from breast to feet, while raising ; himself off his chest 
-on his arms alone,’ 

I did not like the five-shot revolver carbine. It was very 
heavy, so short as to cause a difficulty in clearing the horse’s 
head when shooting forward, and, there was such an escape 
at the breech as to scorch one’s wrists and burn one’s shirt 
sleeves—for in the hottest weather we often left our coats at 
home. The first shot made Morgan shake his ears a while, 
the-muzzle being so close to them, and when I afterwards 
fired from the shoulder several grains of powder struck pretty 
sharply upon my left cheek. ~ . 


CHAP, IX. FORT CARLTON, 125 


ay 
The twelve-bore guns answered best for buffalo-runnitig, 


7 being quickly loaded ;—-though too precious to be loaded in - 
the quickest way, a8 the half-breeds manage the affair. These 
hunters go into action with their mouth full of bullets and a ~ 
large horn of powder round their neck, and after each dis- 
charge pour a chance handful of powder down the barrel, spit 
a bullet in on the top, and strike the stock against their heel 
to send all home; the lock being of the old flint-and-steel 
pattern, with a very large touch-hole, arranges itself if the 
chamber is closed: Of course the gun, thus loosely loaded, 
is held upright till the moment of firing, when the muzzle is 
so sharply. tilted downwards’ that the ball has not time to 
drop out before the powder acts,—though now and then a 
burst does happen. The half-breeds never fire off the 
shoulder from horseback, but hold the gun out with both 
hands, in which manner some of them shoot accurately to’ a 
good long distance. 

July 23d—While we were at the Bad Hill, Indians came 
from a-great camp of Crees, a, day’s march from Tait’s, and 
reported that Blackfoot war-parties were spread all over the 
country, and had been trying to entrap them into ambus- 
cades,—unsuccessfully, however, ‘as they had been too often 
caught to be easily caught again,” This news determined me 
to goto Fort Carlton instead of Fort Pitt, for’thus I might 
hope not only to escape the Blackfeet, who would steal my 

‘horses, but also to avoid the Orees, who would certainly be 
troublesome, even if they did not plunder to the same extent ; 
besides which we should gain the advantage of travelling 
with Tait’s people, who were now preparing for their return. 
As I had hunted enough for the present, there was no longer 
any object in continuing the direct march to Fort Pitt, except 
the possible saving ¢ of a few days on the journey to Edmonton. 


= 


126 © CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL, CHAP. IX. 


That course, however, involved several risks of loss and delay, —~ 
and it was clearly worth while to sacrifice a little time’ by 
way of insurance. aa 

I-was well pleased with our sport among ng the buffalo, 
which to my mind could scarcely have-been-improved. Had - 
slaughter been the chief object, we might have slain hundreds 
of bulls and lean cows—nothing could have been. more easily 
dene; but such cruelty would have weighed heavy on my ~ 
conscience, and, to give my men justice, they showed no . 
inclination for mere. wanton massacre, Not sounting two or ” 
three bulls shot after-a fine run‘and allowed every chance for 
their lives, or slain under somé sudden excitement, I could. 
‘safely say that no buffalo had -been killed hy mijself or mi. 
men except for good, or at all events définite. and’ sufficient, 
reasons, a 

My own success I considered - very “satisfactory. IT had - 
picked out from an immense herd a bull.with a head that 
everybody admired ; and, besides shéoting several good cows, 
_ [had killed one—the fine bartén’ cow that Morgan had 
‘“Out-raced so gallantly—which was acknowledged to surpass — 
“any animal shot by the hunters at either encampment. It . 
was time to leave off. We had alt had enough of it, and the 
lean and fagged condition of our horses told the same tale ; 
for buffalo-running under a July sun comes hard upon grass-——— 
fed animals already wearied by a long and toilsome joutney. 

That morning, accordingly, tents were struck in both the 
camps, and we all set out after breakfast, journeying nearly~ 


"-- due north as we “made our way together in the ditection ol 


Fort Carlton. From the time we passed the R ing Hills 
the country became uninteresting,—-chiefly consisting: of 
damp prairies&covered with long grass and varied with 
swamps and bush, or poplar islands scattered here and there 


a 


“ 


OHAP, IX. - FORT CARLTON: - 497° 


on the verdant sea of plain. We soon came to a regular 
beaten cart-track ; no game was anywhere to be seen, for the 
buffalo were all on the other side of the hills, so, for most 
of the time, I made myself comfortable i in the waggon, travel- 
ling smoothly enough upon that level road, by no means sorry 
to rest myself after the last week’s toil, and glad to spare my 
riding horses as much as possible. 

The absurd Bichon, delighted to find himself again’ in 
richer pasture, beguiled the time by feasting ‘on flowers ° in 
‘his old peculiar way. Poor little Morgan! I Jooked af him 
with a sorrowful heart. It grieved me that we were so soon 


: to be parted. But he was far too thin and worn to go on to 
-‘the mountains; tliere was no choice but to leave him at Carl- 


ton to recruit for the homeward Journey. 
~-On the 24th we camped at a wooded creek, a few miles 
beydind the Elbow of the North Saskatchewan. The river at 


Tree, 


” this place has hardly half the breadth of water that the South, 


Branch possesses where it.makes its great Elbow ; the banks 


- of the former are more. wooded than those of the southern 


stream, but neither so wild nor_so roughly and picturesquely 
broken into heights. In the neighbourhood of our camp 
rose a fine spring, but it was too strongly flavoured with iron 
“ore to be useful for ordinary purposes. 

The next.day we made an early start, travelling for some 
miles before breakfast, and by the afternoon we had arrived 
at Carlton, and encamped ourselves near the river a few 
hundred yards from the Fort. 

Mr. Hardisty, the officer in ¢ rge, at once came to wel- 
come us, offering every assisteaxte in’ the most kind and 
obliging manner. He stayed a while at my tent, and we had 
tea together, after which he returned to the Fort, ~—where, . 
by his hospitable invitation, I might have had a room, but as 


wee 


ne 
128 CHERRY BUSH, THE BAD HILL. CHAP. IX. 


our. stay was to be but a short one, I preferred remaining 
under my own canvas. As things turned out, it was a bad 
arrangemént ; for, presently, a set of drunken Indians pushed 
into the camp, prying everywhere, and making themselves 
quite at home, and between this intrusion and the savage 
attacks of the mosquitoes it was long before we ‘could settle 
ourselves comfortably for the night. ot 


CHAPTER X. . 
FORT CARLTON TO FORT EDMONTON. 


JULY 26th—This morning Mr. Hardisty and I, accom- 
panied by M‘Kay and Tait, rode over to the “ horse-guard,” 
about three miles away on the farther side of the river, our 
object being to leave Morgan, Vermont, Paul, and Anthony, 
who were to be kept therey till my return, and to choose - 
other horses from the Company’s lot, to be hired by us to. 
supply their place. 

All my horses, excepting the Biclion, whose worm-down 
hoofs required a set of shoes, having first been swam over 
to the better pasturage on the other side, we crossed in 
the skiff, and then proceeded on our way through a fine 
grazing country of undulating character, diversified with 
many small lakes and poplar groves, and covered with grass 
of the richest description abounding in different kinds of 
vetches. Looking back towards the Fort, the opposite 
banks of ‘the river seemed like an English park, rising 
after the first steep ascent in gradual slopes luxuriantly - 
clothed with wood, disposed by nature in groups and gladed 
masses, as if some skilful hand had been cutting the forest 
into forms of symmetry. 

' When we reached the horse-guard we beheld a drove of 
about twenty pony mares, all more or less prettily shaped, 


and séme of them very handsome, who were roaming in the 
K 


130 FORT CARLTON TO OuAP. x. 


fertile pastures with a good-looking brown stallion, over 
fourteen hands high, as their companion. There were also 
about fifty horses for carting and general purposes, and from 
among these we selected two stout hays to draw the waggon 
to Edmonton. We also picked out a small light-coloured 
© bichon,” which I afterwards rode back to the Fort—a fat, 
comfortable, lazy little beast, branded on one hind quarter 
-' with the capital letter, O. 

Tait mounted himself on a fine young bay horse belong- 
ing to Mr, Hardisty, but being scarcely broke, it was so 
violent that he passed it on, after a struggle, to my Indian 
friend Napesskes, who had just joined us, .and under his 
handling it went quietly enough for the rest of the way. 

On coming to the river again we descried my poor old 
Bichon running up and down the opposite banks in anxious 
search for his comrades; no sooner did he make us out, 
than he plunged into the water and swam so quickly to 
_ meet us that he reached the skiff before we were half-way 
ACTOSS. 

I then went to the Fort to make a settlement with 
, Numméd, “the old gentleman,” as my men always called 
him. I gave him the wonderful gun with some ammunition, 
\also-some tea and sugar, besides his wages, for he continued 
“to say that he had been misled as to his engagement, and, 
much as I doubted this, I wished to leave no room to any 
one for complaint of my dealings. “The old gentleman,” as 
we heard next morning, immediately went and bought a 
horse from a Cree,—who sold it him a tremendous bargain, 
having stolen it from a man of his own tribe, whom he 
knew to be in hot pursuit; Mr. Nummé then made a mid- 
night flitting with his purchase. He certainly had the keenest 
eye for Number- One. 


CHAP, xX. FORT EDMONTON. 131 


This business settled, I amused myself by looking 
through the store, that: comprehensive place where every- 
thing-required for the Indians or the Company’s employés is 
procurable in greater or less abundance,—clothing, ammuni- 
tion, blankets, groceries, pots and pans, crockery, knives, 
tobacco, and hundreds of miscellaneous unexpected things, 
all stowed away in an inviting orderly disorder, in regions 
redolent of the wild beasts’ skins and furs collected in the 
course of trade. I bought some beads and a few use-. 
ful common articles, and then Mr. Hardisty helped me in 
arrangements for the storage of my skulls and skins and 
-other heavy. goods which’ he had kindly offered to take 
care of til my return. He showed me a grisly bear-skin 
of immense size, larger than I could have thought possible ; 
it belonged to Captain Palliser, who had bought it from: 
an Indian during the previous winter. 

‘T. also left every drop of rum that I had, that I might 
be able, with a clear conscience, to tell the Indians that 
there was none in the camp. I find I can do without 
stimulants, and do not like to be drinking wine or spirits 
when my men have nothing: stronger than tea. Wine they 
would consider altogether out of their line, but spirits they _ 
might be more or less tempted by. I, have no wine, 
"however, nor do I want any, 

After this I went to pay a visit to Mrs. Tait, who lived 
with her husband at the Fort, the mother of the pretty 
» little girl who came to my tent at Cherry Bush, as might 
easily be guessed by their likeness to one another. Mus. 
Tait had been doing some sewing for me, and was now. 
engaged in making me a few pairs of moccasins to take 
home on my return. Thanks to Mr. Hardisty’s kindness, I 
was well supplied with moccasins for use; for on hearing 


132 FORT CARLTON TO CHAP, X. 


that I had none that fitted, he insisted on giving me three 
beautifully finished sets, besides which he presented me with 
a leather hunting-shirt for wear in the Rocky Mountains, 
where the dead and rugged branches in the thick fir woods 
make terrible havoc of all woollen clothes. ; 

Fort Carlton was a large palisaded enclosure, with square 
bastions at each’ of the four corners; most of the houses 
tolerably good, but some not quite finished. It stood about 
a quarter of a mile from the river, at the foot of a bank, 
which had been cleared of wood immediately behind the 
buildings. The clearance was made entirely by Indian 
women under Mr. Hardisty’s direction, for the’ men counted 
it disgraceful to do anything in the.shape of labour. I 
noticed a party of these women washing. clothes near the . 
river in the morning, the wives and daughters, of. the : 
drunkards who were so intrusive just after our arrival. 
One girl might almost be called pretty, but all, without 
exception, were flat-backed and masculine in contour. 

The dogs were very numerous. Their chief use is in 
winter, those at the forts being generally idle at other 
seagons; we put one of them to work, however, making 
him draw things backwards and forwards in a small cari 
which Tait’s children were in the habit of playing with. 
One of the little ones cried to see her cart going away, so © 
we put her into it and made her happy again. 

This afternoon we passed all our baggage across the 
river and camped on the other side, in readiness for an early 
start on the following morning. 

July 2'7th—I was dreaming about certain well- known 
scenes, which seemed the same and yet not the same, for 
they were changed by dream magic and exaggerated into 
glory, each stone transfigured into a rock, each hill into a 


CHAP. XK, . FORT EDMONTON, | 133 


wild and beautiful mountain. The scene was beginning to 
open more clearly, when, at the most interesting moment, 
that wretched animal Pointer, devoured by mosquitoes, made 
a noisy entrance into my tent bringing with him legions of 
the enemy, and I awoke. Alas for him! his stay was 
neither long nor pleasant. Formerly I had sometimes pitied 
his sufferings and, allowed him shelter under my roof, but-- 
his restlessness had always forced me to banish him; 
besides, there was something mean about his nature which 


bad , turned my, liking into dislike, and I could not bear 


him near me: 

I had by this time pretty well learned how to keep out 
the flies, and they never tréubled me at night. Before 
lying down I used to shake the tent and fasten the door- 
flaps very carefully, then searching with a candle it was is easy 


ee pee 


to discover and massacre any insects that remained. 


Something i is generally wanted at the last moment when 
leaving a Fort ;—~more pemmican had now to be sent for, such 


-reports being abroad about the scarcity of food at Pitt and 


’ ¥dmonton, that we dared not trust to getting any supplies at 


4 


either. This delayed us a little, but did not prevent a 
tolerably early start, thanks to being camped on the right 
side of. the river. 

After climbing the steep high bank, we passed through 
the same country as on the previous day, and then came to 
more level plains, though of equally fertile nature. Similar | 
as they are in some respects, these rich pastures look quite 
unlike anything in England. The difference chiefly arises 
from the prevalence of poplars, which stamp a peculiar 
character on the. landscape, for even when young and (no 
larger than weeds, they grow so thickly through the herbage 


as to give it a strange unhomelike tinge. 


a BP FORT CARLTON TO CHAP. X. 
NS re 
' “eT hate the very sight of these poplar prairies, because 


they swarm with mosquitoes, which always abound in long 4 

grass. ,, My joy is in a vast sandy plain, broken with bluffs, 

and carpeted with short, crisp, yellow-brown turf. There 
game abounds, and the abominable fly scarcely dares to 

show his proboscis. Well may the Evil One be called 

Baal-zebub—the god of flies !’ ° 

‘Black, deprived of his friends Morgan and Vermont, 
has begun to scrape acquaintance with old Bichon, whom he 
never used to deign to notice.’ 

‘At dinner time, looking at my meerschaum with a ™ 
magnifying glass, I found, as I suspected, that there was a 
small crack where the bowl joins the stem, so that the oil 
bubbles through and makes a black patch, while the rest of 
the pipe takes on hardly any colour. This is a nuisance, but 
there is some amusement in watching _how_ tobacco affects a. 

oomnmanenore iS THRE a8 GOctors | Studied the - process of digestion through 
a hole that remained open in a wounded man’s stomach.” . . 

‘Towards afternoon we came to a decidedly hilly eountry, 
with numerous small pools and lakes, and a good deal of 
poplar wood.,"Since crossing the North Branch, the whole 
country may ‘be described as tr¥fng to break out into a-wood, — 
and half stcceeding. In the evaiffhg we travelled along the 
shores* ‘of Bear Lake, a very pretty piece of water of some ‘ 
size, with stony promontories, deep bays, and wooded islands ; 
then, continuing for a few miles farther, we reached a small 
artificial-loooking lake, near which we camped. _ 

‘A funny black sleigh dog, as fat as a pig, and possessed 
of only four inches of ‘tail, has come with us, following the 
old man who guides us till we meet La Grace* (a hunter 


* La Grace, so the name is spelt in the Company’s statement of accounts. 


It was, however, pronounced Le Graisse. am oa es 


3 


CHAP. xX. FORT EDMONTON, 135 


then on his way from Edmonton, who soon after joined my 
party). “ Whisky” was rather timid at first, but I threw 
him some bits of meat, and we became very friendly; to the 
great disgust of Pointer, who is given to jealousy’ 

The foxes kept constantly barking round our tents, 
uttering strange sounds, a mixture of the noises of the dog 
and the wolf. It was not a melodious note; but never have 
I known the cry of any wild animal that had not something 
pleasing’ in its cadences, when heard in a solitary desert 
place, where the din of man’s life is far away, where nothing 
reveals itself to the eye or ear but is touched with the 
adorable melancholy of loneliness. . 

July 28tk.—Our march took us over very hilly ground 


to-day. Right upon the track we discovered the remains 
of a broken waggon, belonging probably to some of: the 
Canadians or Americans who had lately passed on their way 
to the gold diggings. I was just thinking how fortunate we 
had been in escaping such disasters, when a loud crash burst 
upon my ears, and I beheld M‘Beath bounding from his cart, 
just clearing it as it upset and rolled over and over in its 
progress to the bottom of a hill. The axle had brokeh, 
nothing else was wrong, and nothing got damaged. A little 
wooded lake happened to be close at hand, so we took the 
" opportunity for our mid-day halt; and while my men re- 
paired the axle, I waited on a sunshiny slope covered with 
a profusion of wild strawberries, aud finished my first read- 
ing of “The Winter's Tale.” * 

July 29th-——We had great trouble in catching Lane, 
who had now wonderfully freshened up and become a very 
handsome old horse. He belonged to a breed that ranges 
wild on the other side of the Rocky Mountains. Though. 


* See Appendix. 


136 FORT CARLTON TO CHAP. X. 


they had taken him when quite -young, no one could ride 
him till he had once been tired nearly to death by drawing 
a sledge loaded with two buffalo cows as far as the Little 
Devil’s Lake and back, with the heavy labour all the while 
of going first to make the track through the ‘snow. He 
gave in as he reached his starting-point at Carlton, upon 
‘which they. immediately got on his back and rode him when 
he was too weak for resistance. Though pretty well tamed 
by this discipline, he was subject to fits of wildness, and 
would never bear that anything should touch his flanks. 

[Kline was the only person who could catch him in his 
difficult moods. It was a study to watch this man’s tactics -. 
—how he walked round and round the wary old animal, bent . 
half double and making the most extraordinary movements,—--— 
till at length Lane grew so puzzled that he forgot to run 
away, while the active Frenchman slipped nearer and nearer, 
then suddenly threw a line over the horse’s head, and secured 
him in an instant.] 

Our road to-day ran pleasantly.over crisp brown turf, 
and took us through an interesting’ country, hilly and 
picturesque, though rather bare 6f wood. As we passed by 
a place called “The Springs,” Kline’s cart stuck fast in a 
creek, and some of the things got a little wet, but the 
damage was not worth speaking of We were preparing to 

halt for our night encampment, when M‘Kay shot a skunk 

' which the dogs had chased out of some bushes near the cart- 

‘track, whereupon there arose such an awful smell that we 
had to go on a good piece farther than we had intended.* 


* In reference to the odour emitted by the skunk, I find the following 
amusing passage in Hearne :—‘¢1 cannot help observing that the fetid smell 
of the latter [the skunk] has not been much exaggerated by any author. When 
I was at Cumberland House in thetfall of 1774, some Indians that were tenting 
on the plantation killed two of these animals, and made a feast of them ; when, 


ax 


= 
owes 


ay 


CHAP, X. FORT EDMONTON, | 137 


July 31st—While we were dining on the shore of a 
large and beautiful piece of water called Jack-fish Lake, one 
of the Thick-wood Crees came paddling over in a canoe from 
the opposite side: my men and he-held a long talk together, 
and I meanwhile read “ Hamlet.” * 

Proceeding on our way, the country still bore a pictur- 
esque appearance, all wood, hill, and lake, but much of 
it had been terribly devastated by fire. The lakes were 
swarming with ducks and geese, the former easily to _be 
picked up in any quantity. - A large white. wolf showed 
himself within fair range; I knocked him over with a shot 
through the haunches, but in spite of a shattered leg, he 
escaped me in the thickly wooded glen-of a neighbouring _ 
—~ereek, which same deep though insignificant rivulet presently 
cost us the trouble of raising all the baggage in \ the carts 
_ before we could attempt a crossing, 

Soon afterwards, arriving at the White Mud Lake; we 
made an early halt there, intending to remain during the 
approaching Sunday, and formed our camp on the top of 
an elevated clay bluff, whose precipitous broken face en- 
countered the wash of the water some twenty yards beneath 
our feet. The lake is triangular, and apparently about six 
_ miles in circumference ; its water is of good quality for use. 


the spot where they were singed and gutted was so impregnated with that 
nauseous smell which they emit, that after a whole winter had elapsed, and 
~ the snow had thawed away in the spring, the smell was still intolerable. I 
am told, however, that the flesh is by no means tainted with the smell, if care 
be taken in gutting, and taking out fhe bag that contains this surprising 
efuvies, . . . . I do not think it is their urine which contains that 
pestilential effluvia, for if that was the case all the country where they frequent 
- would be so tainted with it, that neither man nor beast could live there with 
any degree of comfort,”—HEARNE, A Journey to the Northern Ocean, p. 377-8. 


* See Appendix. 


h 


138 ~ - FORT CARLTON \TO omar. x. 


Sunday, Jui arkived, bringing horses 
for Fort Carlton, which“the old mah, who had now to leave 
us, took under his charge, while the former remained as our 
guide. ‘The queer fat dog Whisky has chosen to stop with 
us. He has rather attached himself to me; being very quiet 
he gives no trouble, and his ways amuse me.’ 

August 1st—We started about 6 o'clock, and break- 
fasted at Turtle deck. Our track led us through a prairie 
country, hilly in parts, and almost entirely blackened by 
recent fires. This made pleasant travelling, for there were 
no flies, there being no vegetation to harbour them, and the 
soil was so soft that the horses did not slip as they had 
been doing of late on the harder ground, through the almost 
glassy polish given to their unshod_ feet_by— contaet—with— 


“the short dry turf. 

I had-an accident to-day, owing doubtless to this very 
cause. The men were halting for dinner at English Creek, 
and as I cantered down a gentle grassy slope to jo them, 
Wawpooss slipped and'fell, throwing me on the point of my 
right shoulder. It hurt a little at the moment, and I félt 
it now and then afterwards, but years passed, ‘before I dis- 
covered that my collar-bone had been slightly dislocated. 

In course of the morning we came to a place called 
Horse Hill, so named on account of a battle between the 

' Crees and Blackfeet, in which forty horses were slain. A 
little farther on, the track brought us to within a mile of 
the Saskatchewan, and continued nearly in that line. ‘Rode 
through an uninteresting country as far as Red Deer Hill. 4 
believe we have mate. a about forty miles to-day.’ 

August 2d—‘ Reached Fort Pitt at 4 o'clock in” the ° 
afternoon. The Fort stands within a hundred paces of the 
river, which is here deep and rapid, free from sandbanks, 


omar. x FORT EDMONTON. 139 
, . - 


and about three hundred yards wide. These last two days 
I have noticed a few spruce firs amidst the eternal poplar, 
but none of any size. In the whole British territory I have 
not yet seen one tree that would be called large in Scotland, 
not to speak of England. A tree thirty feet high and four 
feet round seems a giant here, and is rarely to be met with. 
I can only attribute this dearth of good timber to the fires 
that are constantly devastating the land. In one glen ‘near 
the Qu’appelle (where we found a raven’s nest on the 6th 
of July) there-were oaks of a larger size, but they were of 
no height, for the winds thet sweep the prairie had cut 
them down to the level of the shelter afforded by’ ‘the 
protecting banks, - 


‘The Fort, enclosed. by high palisades ‘with bastioned ' 
corners, farms a square rather more than half the size of 
Catltén. Viewed from above it is like a camp of immense 
tents, owing to the shape and colour of the roofs. Mr. : 
Macaulay and Mr. Sinclair received me with the greatest 
kindness and cordiality. I supped with them at the Fort, 
and we afterwards smoked together at my camp. 

‘There are a number of Indians here, six tents of Wood 
Crees, and also some half-breed “ free” hunters [hunters, that 
is, who are not in the Company’s employ]; and as all of them 
- keep a number of dogs, besides the large lot belonging to the 

Fort, it may be imagined what a nuisance it is. The whole - 
evening and the whole night my men were pelting the beasts 
with sticks and stones; it was all we could do to save our 
meat and harness from their famished maws, , though some of 
them must have been nearly killed by our missiles. 
August 3d.— Mr. Macaulay and Mr. Sinclair breakfasted 
with me, and we afterwards rode to the horse-guard, about 
"eight miles off. M‘Kay came with us on Black,—-whom I] 


2 yes 


a 


rot 
we F, 


140 FORT CARLTON TO on x. 


wished to exchange if possible. Near the place -we-met-tyo 


boys some fourteen years of age, both of them riding. One 


was on a quiet old pony, but the other rode a beautiful ‘bay 
yearling, full of spirit, and so large and well made that it 
might easily have been thought two years older. This colt 
belonged to Mr. Rowland, an Orkney man of forty years’ 
service with the Company, and celebrated for breeding fine 
horses ; its rider was his son, who was considered about the 
best light-weight*rider in the district. ° 
‘The horse-guard was kept by an old French half-breed 
named Charlevoix, in whose tent we waited the arrival of 
Mr. Rowland, to whom a message had been sent requesting 
him to meet us. A nice little girl came and seated herself 


~in the Indian’ fashion ; ; she was evidently his “particula let 


Outside there was a large drove of mares and horses, perhaps si 


hundred and fifty; among them I observed a fine stallion. 
They were grazing in very rich plains, well watered but not 


wet, the best possible country for-horses. All around was hilly,, 


wood growing more or less abundantly over both hill and dale. 
‘Mr. Rowland, a pleasant-looking old man, was not long 


in coming. He saw Black gallop, and then rode him him- 


self. Both he and Mr. Sinclair wanted to get the horse, on 
account of his appearance and great speed, and - various ex- 
changes were proposed on all sides. Finally I parted with 
him to Mr. Sinclair for a well-known buffalo-runner, ten 
years old, a red roan with black points, called “Cendré,” 
account of his colour, and a very neat bichon pony, six 
_ ‘years ‘old, said to be a good runner also, which was bought on 
- the spot at a large price from Charlevoix the horse-keeper. 
‘Considering further that I must soon leave my old 
Bichon, as he had got very thin, I thought it would be better 


‘ 


OHAY. x. FORT EDMONTON, 141 


both for myself-and-the poor beast to part with him now, so 
I negotiated an exchange with Mr. Rowland, who gave me a 
-fine ‘strong three-year-old “cendré” in his stead; receiving 
also a few pounds besides. Bichon is at a discount here. 
They say he is older than I was led to believe, and that 


,. though once a very good runner, he has much fallen off I 


darésay this is true, for he did not seem to me'at all fast, 
although very lasting’ 

Mr. Rowland at first wanted more.on the exchange than [ 
was inclined to offer, and we ended by dividing the difference. 
- Hearing afterwards on good authority that he had_ got rather 
the worst of the bargain, I made out the order for the sum 
he originally mentioned, being unwilling to gain a profit at_ 


~~his expense. I rode the young horse home, and liked him 
enough to assign that as @ reason for valuing him at the - 
larger sum. ‘Mr. Rowland has a number of very good 


_ horses; unfortunately he has a fancy for docking their tails— 


spoiling their beauty, and giving the flies a cruel advantage.. 
In this country they always work their horses at two years 
old, which seems a mistake.’ . 

We got the carts and everything across the river, and 
made a start in the aftemoon. There was a steep bank to 


‘ascend, much higher than that on the northern side; having 
' climbed it, however, we found a good bard road on the top, 
‘along which we drove for four or five miles and then camped. * 


7? 


I was riding Cendré (the Sinclair cendré,—the other one 
Tealled “ Rowland”), a handsome well-bred horse with a 
beautiful head peculiarly fine in the muzzle, and with 


" large, intelligent, gentle eyes. Mr. Sinclair took an affec- 


tionate leave of his favourite. “Poor Cendré,” he said, “I 
shall never see you again.” ‘promised to bring the good 
horse back if care would do it, but I spent my words in vain,” 


~ 


420000 FORT CARLTON TO oar, x, 


“for Mr. Sinclair firmly believed that the Rocky Mountains 
' would finish Cendré, even if some of the others escaped, as he 
was older and more delicately bred than the rest of the band. 

Not far from the Fort we met a Cree riding alone, 
bearing with him a curious red-deer fawn-skin quiver filled 
with ‘arrows. I asked Mr. Macaulay to buy it for me if. ~ 
possible, thinking the Indian would be willing to part with 
_ it, being so near his own tents; but I afterwards heard that 

he did not succeed in getting it. ~ 

August 5th.—This morning we worked at turning large 

“horse-shoes into small ones for some of the ponies whose 
hoofs were much worn. M‘Kay made an excellent job by 
heating the shoes in ‘our camp fire, and bending and shorten- 
ing them on the edge of an old axe. 

At dinner two men came express with letters from Fort 
Pitt, of little consequence as it happened. These messengers 

_ had travelled fifty or sixty miles since sunrise. 

We got quantities of ducks in a small lake, which was 
perfectly alive with them. I shot some, and Short shot some, 
and Pointer caught numbers of young onés as they swam 
about the edges and tried to hide in the overhanging bushes, 
amidst which he ferreted them out most perseveringly. - 

-Later in the day, as M‘Kay and I rode together“behind — 
the carts, we observed a large white female wolf stealing 

“after-us some little distance in the rear. Wishing to 
‘shoot her, M‘Kay dismounted.as soon, és we got out of 
sight, and hid himself in a bush elosé by the road, waiting , 
till she came up; meanwhile I went quietly on so as pot 
to excite her suspicions. . 

Presently the wolf appeared again, still following right 
_ onour track. M*‘Kay let her almost touch the bush that 

concealed him, then gave her the whole of his first. barrel ; 


‘oMAr. x, FORT EDMORTON. 143 


she staggered, but instantly recovering herself, leapt at his 
‘throat, with a tremendous spring; he was ready, however, 
and his second barrel hurled her backwards and rolled her 
into 2 lifeless heap. The gun was only loaded with small 
shot, intended. for ducks, so that very .close quarters were 
necessary in killing such an animal as a wolf, and this one 
was of the largest kind. 

August 6th——The country, which had been hilly .since 
we left Fort Pitt, now became more and more wooded, with 
swamps in the hollows that lay between the hills. The 
Thosquitoes were absolutely swarming; their bites, however, 
had ceased to swell up and fever me as formerly, so it was 
easier to bear with their horrible annoyance. The horses 
seemed to suffer more than we did. Little Bichon was 
quite lame in the near hind-foot from stepping into the 
smoke' fire one’ night; Cendré also had slightly burnt one 
of his hind-feet in the same manner. The poor things used 
to crowd round the fire to avoid the tormenting flies, and in 
struggling to keep their position in the smoke, they pushed 
one another into the midst of the red-hot embers, We made 
a smoke fire for them every night by heaping turf over burn- ° 
ing logs, leaving openings in the mound for the escape of the 
o smoke, which would then continue to issue in dense clouds 
i hours together. 

- During the morning we passed by the Black Mud Hill, 
so named from a place near a swamp where the Indians have 
dug holes to get a certain substance found there [using it, I 
believe, for painting purposes]. ‘Lt was of the colour and 
look of tar, but with no perceptible smell. a, 

Soon afterwards the sky began to threaten, and my tent 
was searcely pitched, when the vain poured forth in torrents, 
drifting bard before a strong north-westerly gale. 


144 FORT CARLTON TO ‘ CHAD. X.: 


While ‘dinner went on a small dark-coloured bird came 
and perched itself on my table. It was ‘so tame that it 
would not leave us, but kept hopping. about among the men, 
and I had difficulty in saving its life from the thoughtless 
cruelty of one of them, whose Indian blood, I suppose, got 
the better of him. I was just in time to save our Little 
visitor from having his neck wrung; strange to say, the 


man, a good-natured fellow at heart, seemed surprised I . 


should care about such a trifle, though ready to oblige me 
by setting his prisoner free. 
August 8th—‘The-rain lasted all Saturday night, the 


storm driving the water through my tent canvas in a coristant 


fine drizzle of spray ; by noon on Sunday it had partly cleared, 
' but continued cloudy and showery. This morning it was very 

wet again; after dinner, howefes 4% determined to start, as 
it seemed a little‘clearer, bul it rained so heavily when we 


seb out that M‘Kay and La Grace wanted to halt in about | 


an hour's time. This I objected to, so we went on and made 
a march of about sixteen miles, camping at last on a pleasant 
dry prairie instead of lingering among the long, wet, mos- 
quito-stuffed grass in which we had spent our Sabbath—as 
my Scotsmen called it in true Presbyterian fashion. 

‘There was rain more or less all the afternoon, but we 


were crossing an open plain, which looks less dismal than’ 


the woods under such circumstances.’ - ; 

We observed the track of a bear in a sandy place near 
some patches of bush, but the animal himself was not forth- 
coming. 

August 9th——‘A mild misty morning, which changed 


into a cloudy showery day. Met an American, Mr. Hind, 


with a Saskatchewan man driving pack-horses, on his road 
from Edmonton to Carlton. He-tells me that the neighbour- 


v3 


x 


cUAP. x. . FORT EDMONTON, 


hood of, Jasper’s BES Fort ‘in ae mountains, Ia good 
country for game. ~ . 

‘While we were halting after dinner, the horses happened 
to move towards the camp, and foolish young Rowland must 
needs come jumping along with his fore-feet close together as 
if in hobbles, which, from late experience, he fancied he had 
on him, though in fact perfectly free. The men were as 
much amused as I was, declaring they had«never seen such 
a thing before. 

‘Sometimes a horse will give two or three leaps just 
_ after the hobbles are taken off, as if still feeling constrained, 
but that is mot surprising. .No one had been near Rowland 
since he was unsaddled, so there was nothing to remind 
him of his fetters. He is raw and awkward and lazily - 
inclined, but I rather like him to ride. The Carlton Bichon 
‘is very smart. ‘ 

‘Halted in an open near a swampy lake. Mosquitoes 
very bad, worse I think this afternoon than I ever knew 
them while actually ‘on the march. At dinner time I 
lighted a small fire in my tent, and found it answer well 
in keeping them out.’ 

August 10th—‘ Had the little prairie-fowls for break- 
fast, the size of blackbirds andrperfectly delicious. 2 

‘Our track still through a flat country all wood and 
swainp; one can seldom see more than a hundred yards on 
either side, seldom as much, indeed. Fine hot weather again. _ 

‘Camped for the night on a knoll a few hours from Ed- 
monton, from which there was a beautiful view- ‘over a circle, 
of wooded plain, perfectly level except where the'steep north 
bank of the river was discernible. My tent was just pitched 
when a Keavy thunderstorm began, and lasted about an hour. 

’ After this it cleared, and there was a lovely effect caused by 


L 
PN 


146 FORT CARLTON TO FORT EDMONTON. CHAP. X. 


the setting sun; on one side all was orange and gold, beneath 
a black cloud which melted into misty gray as it met the 
bright tints of the sunlight, and on the opposite side moved . 
the dark departing thunder-cloud with a perfect rainbow 
enamelled on its face. . 

‘Sat up late reading “Much Ado about Nothing.”- . 
The wolves howled, the night was very cold. 


4a 


5) 


CHAPTER XI. 
FORT EDMONTON. 


AUGUST 11th——It was yet early in the day when we 
found ourselves looking down on the hroad stream of the 
Saskatchewan river, from the summit of a high steep bank 
directly opposite to Fort Edmonton. My men advanced and 
saluted the Fort with a general volley from their guns and 
vifles—a summons promptly/ answered by the despatch of a 
boat, which in a short while ferried us across to the northern 
shore. As we landed, Mr. Brazeau, the officer temporarily 
in charge, and the Rev. Mr. Woolsey, the Wesleyan missionary 
of the district, politely came forward to meet us and offer 
their friendly welcomes on our arrival. 
The Fort, externally an oblong palisaded inclosure with 
‘flanking towers at the corners, at once struck me as being con- 
siderably larger than Fort Carlton, the buildings comprised 
within its limits being likewise more important both in size 
and character. Immediately in front of the principal gate- 
way, the ground fell sudderily in.a deep and almost precipi- 
tous descent to the river, which. at this part seemed to carry 
a great body of water, With an apparent width of about 250 
yards. Upstream the view. was exceedingly pretty, for the 
elevated banks -which confined the channel were picturesquely 
broken, and richly covered with an abundant growth of wood. 
From each side of the enclosure there dropped a sudden 
slope to level plateaus near the fiver-side, thé’ eastmost of 


av 
ae 
- ag 


148 |: FORT EDMONTON. _, CHAP. XL 


which was under cultivation as,an arable farm. They were 
cutting wheat at the time. It seemed a poorish crop; but 
I did not very closely examine it, and perhaps there was 
better grain elsewhere. A windmill placed upon the higher 
ground at the back of the Fort betokened a certain amount 
of agricultural business in the district. | . 

August 12th—_This morning was occupied in consulta- 

tion with M‘Kay in regard to the things that were to be 
. sent back to Carlton. Much had'to be left behind, for our 
cart had now to be given up as utterly unsuitable for the 
rugged mountain-paths we were so soon to follow; and 
travelling with pack-horses, which was. now to be our plan, 
ybliges a very strict limitation of the weight and quantity 
of one’s baggave. 

My journey, as roughly mapped out, was to be thus’ 
arranged : In the first_ instance, I meant to proceed straight 
to Jasper’s, House Fort, and thence southwards along the ~ 
mountains by the Iroquois ‘track as far as the Kootanie 
Plain, or farther if time permitted ; ; after that, I intended to 
cross the plains to Fort Carlton, so as to arrive there no 
later than the lst of October. 

Anxious as I was to set..out before the best of the 
‘season slipped by, I found myself obliged to submit to a few 
days’ delay: for pack-saddles had to be made; horses to he , 
hought, hired, or exchanged; provisions laid in; a hunter 
acquainted with “the, mountains engaged ;.and a ‘guide pro- 
cured who was known, to the’ ‘Blackfeet and able to in- 
terpret their language, “for 3 we ‘weré doité “into sthe country: ., 
inhabited by that tribe and fully” expected to meet them. 

At this time Mr. Woolsey was a temporary inmate of the — 


Fort. We were very frequently together, and had much - , 


conversation on different subjects, amongst which I was 


Pa 


, 4 ote 


- Lye _ 
OMAP. XI. FORT EDMONTON. 149 


articularly interested i in those relating to his own missionary 
labours, and to thie Indians under his spiritual care, 
It was from -him that I first heard some details about 
the characters that had been invented by one of the Lro- 
testant missionaries for the Crees, which, though of rather 
recent introduction, had already got largely into use among 
.them for writing as well as reading purposes. 
\ Owing to the nature of the language, which, it seems, 
-chiefly consists of a few simple syllables repeated in varying 
combinations, syllabic signs had been found more suitable 
than a strictly alphabetical plan; thé new characters had 
therefore been arranged in groups of monosyllables-—every 
group containing the same set of vowels, but each having 
its own prefix which regulated the general form of the group- 
character, while that in turn was systematically varied accord- 
ing to its accompanying vowel. For example, (A, E, 0, AH, 
being the standard set of vowels), 1, F, J, L, represent 
Ma, Me, Mo, Mah: q, p, d, b, represent Ka, Ke, Ko, Kah, 
—and so on. There are also a few terminals, such as n for 
S, | for P,—all the signs being of the simplest and plainest 
nature. To represent a word, the appropriate characters for 
its different syllables are placed together in their order, each 
succeeded by a terminal if necessary ;—thus P=se, A=pe, 
in combination PA =se-pe (river, as perhaps in Missi-s¢ppt) ; 
or J=mo, ns, D=to, n=s; in combination, InDn, 


Mostos (Buffalo). 


Besides showing me several books printed on this system; _ 


Mr. Woolsey was good enough to write out for my use a 
tabular list of characters and terminations; he also gave me 
a neat little Cree hymn-book .as a specimen of the new 
' typography.* 
“ * See Appendix. 


, 


150 FORT EDMONTON. CHAP, X1 


‘He informs me that he has baptized several hundréd 
Indians, in every case believing he had sufficient grounds 
for doing so. , 

‘Speaking of the large contributions that are sent to the 
Wesleyan Missionary Fund, he told me a curious. story 
about a subscription it had lately received, which, in round 
numbers,‘ came to the extraordinary. amount of £18,000. 
The anecdote is as follows :— Se ~ 

‘My. , & poor man but ingenious, wished to take 
out.a patent for a certain invention, but the means were 
wanting. He prayed much ‘and earnestly on the subject, 
and at Iength one day a Quaker came to him and said, 
“ Fritnd, I have an impression thou art'in need of ynoney.” 
Mr. —-— replied that it was so, and explained the case ; 
upon which the Quaker said, “Thou canst have as much as 
thou wantest.” — The invention succeeded, and Mr. 
gav@ £109 to the Wesleyan Mission as. a percentage on 
the profits; Next year, giving inthe same proportion, he 
increased his subscription to £1 a day. Soon afterwards he 
bought an estate in Ireland, in which was a copper-mine ~ 
supposed to be exhausted; he found a fresh vein of ore, and 
money poured in. He then laid by for the mission £7 a 


, day; and at length his gains became so great that, with 


thanks to God for increasing his fortune sevenfold, he began 
to devote £49 a day, which by the end of the year had 
accumulated into the magnificent donation. referged. to 
above.”” ; i 
‘On the subject of the Cree language, Mr Woplsey told 
me that.when speaking of certain things, such ‘as horses, 
dogs, ete., one must not put the pronoun “my” before the 


_houn, but use an altogether different word; for otherwise, 
- according to the idiom, you would be claiming identity with 


a 
No 


CHAP. XL * FORT EDMONTON, 151 


the object you merely meant to claim as your own. There 
was a certain missionary who wished to call some Indians 
to drive away one of his pigs, which was doing mischief. 
Being ignorant of the idiom, instead of expressing himsélf 
as he intended, he ran shouting about the place—“I ama 
pig, I am a pig,” to the.great delight of the natives.* 

‘Mr. Woolsey has’ a high opinion of the Blackfeet. 
They are very fond of Englishmen, and call-them Na-pi-quan, 
which means “white man,” as a term of honour. The 
Yankees they dislike. ‘ ; 

‘One cold day a Blackfoot appeared with nothing on him 
but a single wretched blanket. To account for his miserable 
condition, he explained that one of his children having died, 
everybody, according to the custom of the tribe, had rushed 
nto his tent and taken possession of all-he had, not even 
sparing his clothes. The truth ‘of this being. ascertained, 
the Indian was presented with various things to help his 
in his need’ ~~ - . 

‘Mr. Brazeau, who is an American by birth, informs me 
that hé lived for a great many years in the Missouri and 
Yellowstone country. -He confirms all Catlin’s statements 
about the Mandans, especially as to their customs of cruel 
self-torture; he also affirms the truth and accuracy of 
Catlin’s Indian portraits, which some shallow people have 


attempted to discredit: 


‘Were an angel to wiite his travels, the fiend would 
- inspire some weak creature to pour doubts and sneers and ° 
smqll jokes over the book. Every man who has not spent 


his life in a London garret has seén and dou some things 
, e 

*] have heard similar stories about missionaries in’ the South Sea Islands. 

To the best of my recollection Mr. Woolsey did not. t vouch for the truth of the 


anecdote, but only for its possibility. a7 


2 


© 


‘ ia : ‘ : . 
152 FORT EDMONTON. ~ CHAP. XI. 


removed from commonplace experience, and therefore start- 
ling to many on first hearing of them; but I hold that when 
x man of good reputation states a thing as a fact, it is as 
great a treason to honour to doubt him, as it would be to 
accusé him wantonly of forgery or ‘theft. * Indeed these 
town critics are apt to’expose nothing but their own igno- 
rance in carping at books of foreign travel much assif a 


~ Blackfoot Indian were to argue with a cockney, on: questions 


‘of London life and manners:"~lear them, for Instance, on 
Gordon Cumming and his vast herds of antelopes—but satis!’ 
August 13th SS nimber of dogs madé a disturbance 
about, midnight “by howling and fighting in the passages 
_outside my room. One white wolfish brute began to peer 


“in ab the windows, which happened to look into a verandah, . 


then several others came crowding up, and flrey~ seemed 
half inclined to break through. r prev ‘ented all risk of that 
trespass by’ whipping them down stairs and shutting the 
outer door, which some one had carelessly left open—an 
invitation not likely to be neglected.by these greedy animals. 
No doubt they had: supposed the house to be empty, none of 
the roams but my own being occupied at night, the others, 
such as the large dining-room below, being only made use 
of in the day-time. ' 

‘There are more dogs here than at any place I know. 
"They are+mostly of the ordinary Indian kind, large and 
‘long-legged- and wolfish, with sharp muzzles, pricked ears, 
and thick, straicht, wiry hair. White is one of the most 
usual colours, but Brown, blue-grey, red,_yellow, and white 
\ marked with spots of black or of the other various hues, 
are also common. "Some of them are Black with white 
paws, others are covered with long rough hair like Russian © 
setters. There dre others of a light bluish-grey, with dark, 


4 


\ \ fe 
\ ae ‘ cI 


CHAP. XI. FORT EDMONTON. : 153 


alinost black, spots spread over the whole body, a variety 
which ig said to be frequent in the Blackfoot camps. 
Almost all of them have black noses, but with some of 
the lighter-coloured ones this part is red, brown, or pink, 
which has a very ugly effect.’ - , 

Most of .thém are very wolfish in appearance, many 


.. Weing half or partly, or’ all but entirely, wolves in blood. 
One dark grey dog, indeed, was said to be almost a pure 


wolf, and bore the appropriate name of Mihtkan, the term 
for that beast in Cree.* Seeing him on the plains it would 
be impossible to distinguish him from a common wolf of 
the middle-sized variety, and his temper was spoken of as 
a match for his looks. To do him justice, he behaved in a 
very friendly-ay when his handsome appearance led me 
to notice *him, coming “obediently at my call and allowing 
me to pat him on the head. Had I been aware of his 
character I~ should probably have let -him alone. Dr. 
Hector, to whom this dog belonged, afterwards told me 
that before harnessing or unharnessing*they were obliged to 
stun it with a blow on the nose, on account of its savage 
nature. Some of the others, however, were nearly as bad, 
and needed a taste of the same rough discipline. _ 

Many « of the male dogs of this wolfish sort had been emas- 
culated, to tame their fierceness and spirit without spoiling 
them for work. Mihekan had been so treated, and poor 
good-natured Whisky was another example, though in his 
case. is must certainly have been an act of supererogation. 

In winter these dogs draw sleighs and do nearly all the 
work of the country; at other seasons they dd nothing for 


man, but pass their time in war, love, robbery, and music. 


*  Mahaygan—Oree Indians.” Ricnarpsox, Fawn. Bor, Am., vol. i, 66. 
My spelling represents the pronunciation of the word as T heard it. 


i 


154 FORT EDMONTON. CHAP. XL 


Neglected as these noisy, dirty animals are in their months 
of idleness, unfed, kept in bare life by plunder, the mark 
for every passer’s stick or stone, they are highly valued by 
their owners, and a team of fine, good, well-trained dogs 
will bring a handsome price, especially when the winter 
snows begin to come on. ~ 

‘Read Lewis and Clarke's travels, finished Harmon's 
Journal, also read most of Father De Smet’s missionary 
travels. The: latter gives an interesting account of the 
conversion of many of the Kootanie and Flat-head Indians. 
From the exaggerated, forcible-feeble style of the writer I 
felt inclined to doubt if his success had equalled his belief 
in it; but Mr. Brazeau assured me that these Indians were 
now really good Christians, truthful, brave, and moral, and 
so honest that if they find even the smallest thing, such as 
a pocket knife or a piece of tobacco, they will bring it to 
the camp of the probable loser and cry it up and down till 
he is discovered. 

‘Mr. Brazeau considers that, to the west of the mountains, 
the Roman Catholics have wrought a great work of reforma- 
tion ‘among the natives—-God speed them, say I with all 
my heart. In this district, however, he considers that 
Protestant and Roman Catholic teachers alike have little 
influence for good. The Indians listen to them, pretend 
to believe and obey, and obtain baptism, but as soon’ as : 
the missionary takes his leave they relapse into their 
former practices, All with whom I have conversed agree 
in thinking that little or nothing can be done to improve 
the adults of the Cree, Ojibway, Assiniboine, or Blackfoat 
tribes, and believe that the only hope lies in teaching and 7 
influencing the young, before evil and reckless habits become 
a part of their nature. 


CHAP. x1. FORT EDMONTON. " 155 


‘Tt seems to me (and to my informants also) that the 
clergy of evety sect make a great mistake in obliging con- 
verted Indians who have several wives to put away all 
but one. A Blackfoot. chief lately spoke good sense on 
this subject. “Tell the priest,’ he said to Mr. Brazeau, 
“that if he wishes to do anything with my people he must 
no longer order them to ‘put away their wives. I have eight, 
all of whom I love, and who all have children by me— 
which am Ito keep and which put away? _ Tell those who 
have only one wife not to take more, but do not talk about 
putting away’ wives already married.” ° 

‘This chief, however, injured the moral force of his 
remarks by going on to say that his eight wives could 
dress a’ hundred and fifty skins in the year, whereas a 
single wife could only dress ten, supposing she were always 
well, and that such a loss of property was not to be thought 
of. He also told the priest not to object to rum-drinking, 
as the love of it formed part. of the very nature of his 
people. These evils, he said, time might cure, but they 
must not be too vehemently opposed at present. 

‘However plainly self-interest betrays itself in this 
speech, however impossible it would be to lower Christ- 
janity by” sanctioning .drunkenness, some of the Indian’s 
words appear to. me not “unworthy of attention. Let the 
injury | done to the afféctions of husband and wives, and 
the cruelty - of depriving so many women and children of 
their protectors, be weighed against the’ considerations that 
prevent polygamy among ciyilised people, and surely, in the 
absence of a direct divine command, the former will bear 
down the scale. There is no absolute commandment against 
polygamy, though its inexpediency might besinferred from 
. Christ’s reference to the original order of creation ; but 


156 FORT EDMONTON. CHAP. Xt. 


while things inexpedient may become things unlawful to the 
enlightened man, the case of the unenlightened is widely 
different ; and the mere telling of truths to a savage no 
more amounts to the making him-an enlightened man, than 
shooting a turnip from a cannon through the body’ of an 
ox would amount to feeding him for a year, and letting 
him gain fatness by processes neither you nor he could 
entirely explain. io 

‘We must remember that polygamy was allowed to the 
Jews, and in certain cases even commanded; and it upsets 
all ideas of right and wrong to assert that the Almighty 
would in any case command what is evil in its very essence ;— 
to love God would be impossible for an upright mind were 
such a procedure fully apprehended as conceivable. In his 
Epistle to Timothy, St. Paul decrees. that a bishop must 
be the “husband of one wife,” thus ‘plainly declaring that 
persons differently circumstanced were to be found within 
the Christian pale; if this be admitted, we obtain a guiding 
star to follow if we choose. 

‘Dr. Livingstone, in dealing with the African savages, 


“allowed them full liberty with regard to their supernumerary 


wives, merely recommending separation if practicable, and 
forbidding polygamy in future. The result was’ that his 
sincerer converts in course of time endeavoured to follow his 
advice, from anxiety to reach to the utmost heights of Chris- 
tian excellence, instead of, like too thapy American Indians, 
humouring the missionary and obtaining baptism by feigned 
compliances offered from interested motives and evaded at 
the first opportunity. 

‘I was amused in Father De Smet’s letters to read the 
following remarks on the fastings of the Indian warriors:— 
“ Before setting out for war they observe a strict fast. . . 


ee 


CHAP. XI. FORT EDMONTON. 157 


< 

for four days. During this interval their imagination is 
excited to madness, and either from the effect of weakness 
or the warlike projects which fill their minds, they pretend 
that they have extraordinary-visions.” For “warlike pro- 
jects” substitute “religious fervours,” and strike out “pretend” 
as uncharitable, and the Reverend Father has philosophically 
accounted for various miracles believed in by the more 
ignorant of his own church!’... [So far good, but—to my 
former self I say it—There are more things in heaven and 
earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy.] 

This afternoon’a man brought for my inspection a fine- 
looking red-dun horse, which he wished to’ exchange for 
Cendré. It was branded on the shoulder ‘with an open. 
hand, and on. the quarter with a figure very like a gallows 
though really meant to represent a man,—marks signifying 
that some former Indian owner had killed an enemy off 
this horse’s back. Its age seemed about the same as 
~~Cendré’s, but’ it was in better travelling condition. The 
man declared that he wanted my horse, because having bred 
it he felt an affection for the animal, and regretted that it 
should go to certain death on a journey so much beyond its 
powers. Believing this to be partly a bond jide reason, I 
consented to try the red horse on the’ following Monday, 
with some idea of agreeing to the bargain if I found him 
- suit. Wawpooss being evidently unfit for farther travels, I 
gave him in exchange for a very pretty young cream-coloured 
pony. My men had plenty of -work in shoeing the horses. 
Old Wawbee in particular showed great vice, and had to 
be cast and fastened before anything could be done with 
him... 
Sunday, August 14th.— After breakfast we had service 
- in the large dining-room, at which a number of the men 


é 


158 FORT EDMONTON. oar. x1, 


and one or two women were present. Mr. Woolsey -read 
the liturgy without the litany, and afterwards preached a 
sermon. ; 
‘We had another service in the evening. A converted 
Indian officiated as clerk and led the singing, and but. for 
some trifling mispronunciations one could hardly have 
known him-fronr~an Englishman acting in the same’ 
capacities. While we sat‘in solemn silence just before 
prayers began, a little boy ran down the passage outside, 
and suddenly strack up an Indian’ war-song-—“ Hi, hi, 
ah, he-—ah’”—-or some such sounds, in the shrillest of 
tones, half yelp, half howl, with an inconceivably ridiculous 
effect. There was a momentary struggle, then one universal 
roar of laughter. 
‘In all Indian music that I have heard there is a re- 
markable likeness to the howling of wolves, mingled with 
the droning growl of a bear. The Blackfeet, however, are - 
said not only to excel all other tribes i in music, but to have 
really fine voices.’ 
August 15th.-—After arranging an exchange of Nez- 
blanc and Gris for two sound useful animals, L,rode with Mr. 
Brazeau to the haymakers” tents, taking the opportunity of 


trying the red-dun horse that had Blackfoot hieroglyphics, ’ 


on his skin. He éarried me pleasantly and well, but I 5 
observed a suspicious lump on one of his forelegs near the, 
fetlock, which decided me to keep my own good horse, 
though he was in such poor condition. It would have been 
a mistake to do otherwise, for, besides his inferiority to my 
Cendré, the dun, as I afterwards discovered, had a trick of 
turning lame after a few days of steady hard work. 

Again I had cause to admire the fine riding of the boys. 
Little fellows ten or twelve years old would jump on the 


CHAP. XI. FORT EDMONTON, 159 


back of any horse they could lay hands on, and gallop him 
about the place, with no saddle at all, and with -no better 
bridle than a cord round his lower jaw. They were’perfectly 
_ fearless, and sat their horses with a firmness, spirit, and 
grace very beautiful to see, guiding them at their will by 
movements scarcely discernible. 

I now succeeded in engaging a guide for the mountains, 
an oldish French half-breed, named Antoine Blaidoine, an 
experienced hunter, and well acquainted with most of the 
country we intended to visit. He was to have the same 
pay as some of my other men, viz. £5 a month,—his pay to 
continue till his return to Edmonton. 

As I was smoking at-the gate of the Fort, Lapataque— 
the principal Cree chief, though for many years he had 
hunted for the Company—bappened to be standitig near me. 
Wishing to light my pipe, I brought out some ordinary 
fusees, which seemed to be so much of a novelty to Lapa- 
tdque that I gave him two or three from my box as speci- 
mens. I was afterwards surprised to hear that he had been 
highly pleased with this trivial present, going to one of his 
friends expressly to show him the matches, and tell that 
_ they had been given him by the “chief” himself. ‘This 

shows how far very small kindnesses will go with an 
Indian of the right sort.’ oe 

! Mr, Brazeau was smoking in my room after supper, 
and gave me a great deal of interesting information. He 
again vouched for the truth of Catlin’s book, and further 
mentioned to me that he had signed one of the letters, in 
the first volume of that work, which testify to its perfect 
accuracy.* 

‘He told me that at the American forts the British flag 


ag 
* CatLin, North American Indians, vol. i. pp. 11-13. 


- 


160 FORT EDMONTON. CHAP, XI. 


is treated with the meatest respect, and in proof: men- 


tioned that a young’man at one of these forts having 


ny 


taken a Union Jack from the hands of an Indian who had 
come to trade, and kicked it about, the superintendent lec- 
tured him publicly, and made him pay the Indian a very 
heavy fine. On other occasions Indians have received pre- 


‘sents at the American forts for the special reason that they 


were wearing British medals. At our own forts the Ameri- 
can flags, which the Blackfeet often bring with them, are 
treated with corresponding-respect, and are spoken of to the 
Indians as “ good” flags.’ 

In answer to some remark of mine about Pe-toh-pee- 
kiss (The* Eagle-ribs), a Blackfoot, whose portrait is in 
Catlin’s work, Mr. ‘Brazeau assured me that that Indian 
was a great warrior indeed, and a very noble fellow. No 
less than eleven white men, chiefly free trappers, had met 
their death at his hands. In most cases, however, they had 
brought this fate upon themselves, for Pe-toh-pee-kiss had 
slain them in self-defence against treacherous attacks made 
on him during his different attempts to arrange a truce. 

On one occasion he Kad charge of letters for a Mr. 
Vanderbirt, but that gentleman being at the head of a 
large party it was not safe. to approach him rashly, so 
Eagle-ribs and his people ‘halted in concealment a little 
way off, to paint themselves and prepare for a -formal 
advance. Meanwhile, however, Mr. Vanderbirt and three 
of his men went forward to reconnoitre, the discovery of 
a newly killed buffalo having raised the suspicions of the 
party, though their leader himself would nat believe that 
any Indians wére near. 

’ These reconnoitrers unluckily rode straight into the 
middle of the concealed Blackfeet, who quietly formed a 


CHAP. XE FORT EDMONTON. 161 


"circle round them, then suddenly sprang up and attempted 
to seize them,—with no bad intention, but. merely to secure 
hostages for their qwn safety when approaching the white 
men’s camp. Mr. anderbirt, however, at once fired at the 
nearest Indian, killing him on the spot, and then rode for 
his life, but ere he had well started his horse was shot, and 
in falling pinned his leg to the ground. 

He rose on one knee, drew a pistol, and drove the fiuzzle 
into the face’ of an Indian who was rushing upon him, 
pulling the trigger at the same time; but he had not 


observed that the cock was bolted, there was no discharge, 


and he only succeeded in gashing his opponent’s cheek by 
the force of his blow. The other Indians immediately- took 
their knives and cut Mr. Vanderbirt in pieces. - 

Pe-toh-pee-kiss soon afterwards came to Mr. Brazeau 
and explamed the oceurrence. He brought with him the 
unfortunate man’s ‘pistols—whith wie subsequently sent to 
his relation’, the rifle he could not bring, for it had been 
butied beside the warrior it had slain. 

‘A short while after this event, Pe-toh-pee-kiss went 
towards an American party and attempted to treat for peace. 
A few Americans rode to meet him, headed by a man named 
Bridger. ‘This villain; desiring revenge on the Blackfoot, 
treacherously concealed his rifle between his leg and the 
saddle, and, when Stooping down to shake hands with Eagle- 
ribs; he societly= pushed the weapon forward and fired, 
Happily the Indian ‘saw the trick in time to save himself, 
though the bullet cut away the powder-horn that lung on his 
chest. Wpon, this the Blackfeet fired at Bridger slightly 
wounding hin, and as he galloped off lodged several arrows 
in the lower part of his back. Seeing his condition, a man 
who was on baddish terms with hin, Black Harris by 

M . 


e 


. 162 FORT EDMONTON. CHAP. XU 


naine, mockingly cried out-——“ Hulloa! Bridger, what's. the 
matter now?” “Only some feathers in my ——,” 
answered Bridger, who was a coarse fellow. His conduct 
Was much blamed by his companions. 


* One of the party was a Spaniard, who was married to 


a Blackfoot woman. She had just then ridden over to the ~ 


Indians to see her brothers, and to interpret between the two 
sides. As.soon as the firing began the Indians seized her, 
but her horse escaped and came back to the Americans, with 
her little baby hanging to the saddle in its upright cradle of 
hoards. If parted ffom its mother the child was sure to die; 
so the poor father declared he would risk his own life for its 
sakes and he rode boldly with it to the Blackfeet. They 
received him kindly, and gave the baby to its ‘mother, but 
refused to let her go back. They invited her husband, 
instead, to join their tribe. He could not do so then, he 
told them, for he was under other engagements, but without 
fail he would come'to them in a few months : they let him 
go, and he faithfully kept his word’ 
“Pe-toh-pee-kigs (Petdch-pekiss, as Mr. Brazeau pro- 
nounces it) is a pl Indian. There are three tribes of the 
_ great Blackfoot n tion, ——viz. the Blackfeet, the Blood Indians, 
and the Piégdns, all of whom speak the same language and 
live in close alliance. [The Fall Indians, also, are of the 
same race.] It is easy, I am told, to distinguish them apart 
by differences of dialect and pronunciation, like those.in the 
various districts of England or Scotland ; besides, the Blood 
Indians dress more neatly and are finer and bolder looking men 
than the Blackfeet, who in tuin surpass the Piegans in these 
respects, § mo 
‘The Blood Indians haveta among gtbem a number of com- 
paratively fair men, with grey eyes, and hair both finer and 


CHAR, XE. FORT EDMONTON. 163 


lighter coloured than usual in the case of pure Indians. 
Pe-toh-pe-kiss.is a man of this complexion. This tribe is 
supposed to bear ifs savage name, not ‘from any peculiar 
cruelty of disposition, but because, unlike the other tribes, 
its warriors do not steal horses, but only eis the blood 
of their enemies, whom they generaly*6vercome, for they 
are among the bravest of all the natives. 

* ¢The Blackfeet are a livelier race than the Crees. The 
latter are quarrelséme when-in liquor, while the former show 
their jollity by dancing, singing, and laughing, and kissing 
and hugging one another with all sorts of absurd antics. 
Though so fond of rum the Blackfeet are not habitual drunk- 
ards. They get completely drunk once or twice a year, but 
at other times take nothing stronger than thé--coffee whith ~— 
the American Government sends them as part.of an annual 
“subsidy—for a great part of their territory lies south of the 
British frontier. They consider—and not without some 
reason——that their periodical excesses are good for them, 
curing the biliousness caused by their mode of living. 

‘In the British territory most of the white men who have’ 
got Indian wives are married to Crees, but some have allied 
themselves with the Blackfeet, and it is said that the women 
of that tribe never desert their husbands as the others some- 
times de. On the American side there are comparatively 
few half-breeds, and few or none of them are past middle 
age ; while across the border, in the Company’s domains, there 
are grandfathers of mixed blood whose own grandfathers 
were half-breeds. . . 

‘Mr, Brazeau tells me that the only Indians whose women 
are chaste are the Sioux, who at least equal Europeans in 
this respect. The Mandans and Crows, on the other hand, 


are particularly bad in their morals. The Sioux, of all 


164 . FORT EDMONTON. CHAP. XL” 


Indians, are those who most keep to their old mode of dress ; 
the Blackfeet and the rest are all rapidly adopting blankets 


and capots, aud giving up the beautifully painted robes of __ 


their forefathers. The few painted robes that are now made 
are inferior in workmanship to those of days gone by.’ 

August 16th—The rain had at last disappeared and 
bright sunshine come in its place; the weather looked invit- 
ing for a journey. Muy. Woolsey Jeft the Fort that morning, 
and set out on one of his missionary expeditions, and by the 
following day I earnestly hoped to get away also. Nothing 
was wanting for my departure but-the arrival of Piskan 
Munroe, ‘a Scotch half-breed, whom it was important to engage 
as interpreter, for he not only knew the Blackfoot language, 
but was on intimate terms with the tribe, being closely 
connected with it by blood. He was now daily expected. 

I added another horse to my lot by exchanging the 
Colt's carbine fora useful sort of animal, receiving a trade- 
gun as make-weight besides: I did not think it a very good 

bargain, | but horses were a necessity, and I was glad to 
obtain them on any fairly reasonable terms. 

Whilst staying at the Fort I bought from a half-breed a 
knife of what is catled the “dag” pattern, a heavy, flat, 
double-edged blade about eight inches long, of triangular 
shape, tapering to-a-point frony a width of same two and a 

“half inches ‘at the base. The Edmonton hunters always 
carry very "stihng: and large knives, for the purpose of cut- 
ting through ‘branches when traversing the dense fir woods 
that cover a great part of the-.country; some of them 
use extremely heavy ones, half knife half axe,—-like a 
narrow sort of: butcher's cleaver with a point instead of a 
squared-off end, or perhaps more resembling the peeuliar ° 
oriental sword so often represented in old pictures and 


? 


cuar. xt FORT EDMONTON. 165 


engravings. Indeed, I have been told that these demi-bills 
were originally copied from a weapon borne by one of the 
hill tribes in India. , 


My.“dag” is mounted with‘a curious bone hilt made 
for it by its former owner, and fits into a*moose leather 
sheath embroidered_handsomely with bead-work in a simple 


but very rich and efffctive pattern. 
¢ 


EDMONTON HUNTER'S DAG. r 


£ CHAPTER XU. 
FORT EDMONTON TO THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS, 


AUGUST 17th.—It was late in the afternoon before we got 
away from Edmonton, and we had only accomplished five 
miles when our’ camping time arrived. We halted by the 
side of a small lake. The night was beautifully clear and 
starry, with an aurora glancing in-the skies ; [ was glad to be 
once more under canvas, amidst the odours and sights and 
sounds of free nature. The grass was glittering with dew ; 
it grew rank and high, but luxuriant as_it was, theré were 
no mosquitoes harbouring in it. Some touch of frost had 
doubtless annihilated them, for the extreme sharpness of 
the air as night wore on,.showed only too plainly that sum- 
mer was gone by, and that even the sunniest days would 
now be followed by hard and bitter nights. 

August 18th—There was pleasant travelling to-day, 
through a pretty country,—wooded for the most’ part, except 
whfere a great fire had done its work of destruction, leaving 
only the timber that was’ growing in the deeper hollows. 
Firs now appeared plentifully in the forest, and the trees were 
altogether larger than any we had lately met with. Towards 
afternoon we entered a very hilly district, studded with nume- 
rous small lakes, and covered with the richest grass; we 
rode: on till dusk, and finally camped at a place about ten 
miles distant from the mission settlement of Lake St. Ann. 

August. 19th.—When not far from St. Ann we were met 
by Mr. Moberly, of the Company’s service, who was making 


CHAD. X11. THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS, 167 


his return from Jasper’s House, where he had till lately been 
officer in charge. He obligingly halted with us for an hour 
or two, while I wrote some letters to go with his party. 

His account of the post he had so recently quitted was 
very fai from encouraging :—no game in the neighbourhood ; 
the people starving, and making haste to leave the desolated 
place. He advised me not to waste time by going to Jasper's 
House, but to track up the M‘Leod river, which woul ring 
me sooner to the mountains, and save mea perfectly Nuseless 
round. The highest peaks, he informed me, rose neat\the 
point at which I should in that case enter ; and southwards 
from thence to the head of the South Saskatchewan, there 
extended about a ten days’ march of country, which, as he 
believed, no European had ever seen (one half-breed hunter, 
perhaps, had long ago been there, but it was very doubtful), 
where bears and wild sheep were certain to be abundant. 
Should we meet a hunter named Paulette, as would probably 
happen, he strongly advised me to engage .him. If I made 
this journey, however, it would be impossible to get back 
to Carlton before the end of October—Be it so! said L 

On our arrival at St. Ann, we proceeded to the mission- 
house, where we met with a most cordial reception —‘ Had 
the pleasure of dining with Péres Lacome and Le Frain 
at the Roman Catholic mission-house—agreeable men and 
perfect gentlemen. What an advantage Rome has in this 
respect—Protestants constantly send vulgar, underbred folk 
to supply their missions, Rome sends polished, highly-eduedted 
gentlemen. Then how much the best is her mode of addres- 
sing the Indian mind ;—for example, every Indian ;who joins 
the Mission Temperance Society is given a handsome model 
to wear.” [This appeals to their pride or vanity, and is far 
more effectual than mere dry exhortations. ] 

* ie 


AN 
cy) 


_ \ 


168 FORT EDMONTON TO CHAP. XL 


On the pressing invitation of my kind hosts I remained 
for the night at the mission-house—‘Everything there is 
wonderfully neat and flourishing, it is a true oasis in the 
desert. The cows fat and fine, the horses the same, the dogs, 
the very cats, the same. A well-arranged and well-kept garden, 
gay with many flowers—[some of them the commonest flowers 
of the woods and plains, brought to perfection-by care and 
labour], The house beautifully clean; the meals served up 
as in a gentleman’s dining-room. Excellent preserves of 

\ Sariee Dernies and wild raspberries ;—everything made use 
f and turned to account.’ 

Sufrounded by such comfort and refinement, and in the 
society of such agreeable entertainers, I passed a most plea- 
sant evening, one that often recalled itself to my memory 
amidst the experiences of later times. 

The rooms were decorated with religious prints, and there 
was likewise a good library of books of a similar character. 
In my own bedroom were several of the latter, which I looked 
through with interest, among them, however, was one which 
it surprised me to find in such honourable company—a cheap 
Dublin publication called The Life of the Virgin Mary, a. 

pamphlet, ‘full of falsehoods as gravely told and reasoned on 
as any chapter in Baron Munchausen’s travels.’ (Sueh.” 
childish fables, though possibly attractive to simple-minded 
people in other lands, seemed to me ill adapted to impress 
the Indians, who are not wanting in shrewdness, and whose 
own supernaturalism is of a grave and sombre character. 
But the success of the mission convinces one that this 
foolish book could not have been in general use, whatever 
accident had brought it all the way from Ireland] 

‘Lake St. Ann is a sheet of water about seven miles long. 
The Indians call it Great Spirit Lake; it is also known by 


e 


' 
a 


~~~ in particular that I greatly fancied, but I found he was not to 


i 
4 
} 


CMAP. XIt THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS: 169 


the nameof God’s Lake,’ [It was sometimes designated Manito 
Lake, which merely means Spirit Lake, a prefix being required 
to denote whether a good or an evil spirit is intended] 
August 20th—Much as [ liked St. Ann I should not 
have stayed there so long, time being precious, but for the 
hope of buying a few more horses. There was one black coh 


be thought of, having been given to the missionaries as a 

token of gratitude by an Indian who had met with some 

remarkable kindness at their hands, Pére Lacome, however, 

anxious to oblige me, though the mission itself was not over 

well supplied, brought me two very good horses this morning, 

—one of them a fine strong cendré, the other auseful bay,— 

which I bought for £19 apiece ; at the same time I purchased 

a bag of excellent pemmican. Talso bought from M. André, 
Cardinal, for £20, a large brown hipse that went by the 

name of “Brun Farouche.” boss 

‘T felt quite sorry to leave St. Ann} all was so kindly and 
pleasant at the Mission. The good fathers loaded us with 
provisions—fish, potatoes, dried meat, ete. God bless them 
and prosper their mission !’ 

It was about 11 o’clock when we set out; we dined at 
Sturgeon Creek, and halted for the night on the shore of Lac 
des Isles, 2 narrow lake about twelve miles long, with many 
low wooded islands. ‘The whole of the day our road was 
extremely bad, running through dense woods, chiefly of poplar 
brash with a few firs, and often through deep morasses filled 
with fallen timber. It was one incessant struggle. There 
was no longer a road wide enough for carts, only a narrow 
foot track, and the horses had to force their way through the — 
brush, which tore everything to pieces. One’s gun had to be 
carried under the arm instead of across the saddle, which was 


ty 


170 FORT EDMONTON TO | CHAP. XL 


very tiring at first, especially with a strong double-barrelled 
rifle like mine. I rode:the Pitt Bichon-after dinner. He is... 
not good in mire, and rolled over on his side in ¢ one deep place, 
after sticking on the concealed trunk of a Sunken tree.’ 

The day had been fine and sunny, it was succeeded by a 
brilliant starlit night. As I stood at my tent-door a little 
after midnight, I beheld in the heavens before me the magnifi- 
cent Orion group, and Aldebaran with his kindred. stars, con- 
stellations I had not looked on for many a week; but the 
beautiful luminary Spica Virginis was no longer visible. 

Sunday, August 21st-—Our camping ground was bad, so 
we marched a few miles along a better road than yesterday’s, 
and halted when we came to a sort of prairie on a hill at the 
end of the Lac des Isles. 

August 22d.—Matheson was taken ill in the night, and - 
continued in a good deal of suffering. I prescribed some 
simple remedies from my medicine store, and by evening he 
was nearly well again. 


Soon after starting we crossed Pembina-River, a shallow 


stream about sixty yards wide, flowing in a rapid current over 
a bed of stones and gravel. The banks were very pretty; not 
monotonous, but broken and varied like those of a highland 
river. Not more than half-a-mile of its course could be seen 
from our crossing-place ; below us it wound out of sight, be- 
_ tween high steep banks with rocks breaking through the soil 
and trees scattered here and there ; upstream, the shores were 
* Jower and less rugged, but, immediately above us, the right- 
hand bank was perfectly bare of wood, and shaped itself into 
a high terrace of almost artificial appearance, carpeted all over 
with short and mossy turf. 
Our dinner halt was beside Buffalo Creek, a: flat-shored, 
stony-bedded stream, smallér and less rapid than the Pembina. 


CHAP. X11. THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS, 171 


. 


A quantity of trees, long ago cut down by beavers, lay scattered 
about the place, and when we camped at sunset we saw 
more of their work, for our tents were pitched on a meadow 
of the richest pasturdége, which had once been the bed of a 
lake formed by these curious-animals in days gone by. The 
dams were almost entire, and very easily traceable, though 
quite overgrown with grass and herbage. 

The country, all that day, was tolerably dry, though 
_ thickly covered with wood, and flat for the most part, except 
at the descents into river valleys; the track was better than 
it sometimes had been, but we had hard fighting to get 
through the brush, which was chiefly poplar intermixed with 
young firs, with a few larger ones here and there. 

No woollen clothes, but the stoutest, can stand against 
these horrible thickets, full of sharp ends of broken branches 
of dead fir-trees concealed among the unyielding foliage of 
the young poplars. Fortunately 1 had clad myself in Mz. 
Hardisty’s present—the leather hunting-shirt, which was 
very comfortable, as well as a couplete protection against the 
hardened spikes that met one at every turn. All the men had 
come out in leather’ since we entered the wood country, and 
looked infinitely more picturesque and sportsmanlike than 
when dressed in their blue cloth capots. Some of them had 
mounted little blue caps, covered with streamers of ribbon 
of different colours,—after the gay fashion of Saskatchewan- 
land, where taste -seems freer to indulge its fancies than 
in the graver regions of Fort Garry. ° 

No traces of large game had yet appeared, but there 
were vast numbers of ducks ; Munroe and Antoine, who had 
walked on in advance, brought in ten couple of them, and 
could easily have shot more. We also saw a good many 
pigeons, one of which I shot with my rifle. They were plump, 


compact little birds, and made delicions an 


oN 


172 FORT EDMONTON TO CHAP, XII. 


August 23d.—The country continued much the same in 
character, but, for the first time, a few larches showed them- 
selyes. Not a tree of any size was visible ; one everywhere 
beheld the ruins of buimt pines, amidst hosts of poplars ‘and 
young seedlings, chiefly of the Black American and Scotch 
Fir varieties, already nearly filling up the vacant ground. 
To-day we were constantly among alder brush, and had much 
trouble and difficulty in getting through it. 

One of the horses belonging to the Company’s lot strayed 
from the others, and though Mackay followed it a long way 
into the thickets he finally lost its track, and we never 
heard of it again. [When this happens, a horse is sometimes 
recovered long afterwards ; but it more often perishes, espe- 
cially if it has strayed towards the winter time, and at any 
rate it seldom comes back to the rightful owner.] 

After dinner I rode forward with André Cardinal (who 
was accompanying us for part of the journey), and made some 
_ good rifle practice at birds on the trees near the track side, 
shooting, through the neck or head, one “partridge,” —or rather 
grouse, of the sort that perches in trees, and tastes of fir-tops,* 
—and two pigeons, the latter at forty and seventy yards. 

Our camp for the night was formed beside Buffalo Creek, 
which we had crossed the previous day, and now re-crossed. 
There was a glimpse of the outskirts of the mountains in the 
direction of the Athabasca, but it was a dim and far-off view, 
many a long mile having to be accomplished ere we could 
traverse the intervening space. . . 

August 24th—There were distant thunderstorms and 
threatenings of rain all night, but the weather kept fair 


* Petrao Canadensis. The Spotted Grouse. Wood, or Spruce, or Swany 
Partridge—Hudson’s Bay Residents. Mistic-apeetheyoo, or Eithinyoo-apecthe- 
yoo—Crees, Le Perdria du savanne—French Canadians, RICHARDSON,— 
Faun. Bor.-Am., vol. ii. p. 346, : 


CHAP. XH. THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 173 


though very cold, and after dawn the sun came out brilliantly. . 
Two more of the horses chose to wander, but they were 
-recovered without much trouble, and then we began a very 
hard and toilsome march, plunging through bogs—which, in 
Cree fashion, we commonly called « Muskegs”—and forcing | 
a passage through brush and thickets of young pine. Our 
track fortunately kept ptetty level, though the country was 
inclined to hilliness. In course of the’ “day we crossed the 
forks of a tributary of the M‘Leod,—two streams known as 
Les Denx Riviéres, clear mountain rivwetg running swiftly 
over thin beds of gravel and. About 5 PM. we came to 
another stream, named Thick Brush Creek, where we found a 
Jasper’s House lroquois camping with his family, consisting 
of his wife, two children, and a servant girl, 

As it wags then too late to goon to the M‘Leod river, the 
road being bad and destitute of camping-ground, we deter- 
mined to halt where we were; accordingly we pitched our 
tents not far from the place chosen by our new friends. 

This had been a most fatiguing day. In many parts the 
track was barely wide enough for a loaded animal to pass 

aketween the trees, and it was generally so soft and deep, from 
the effects of former traffic on such wet and sponge-like soil, 
that the horses were for ever trying to escape from the 
treacherous boggy ditch in which they found themselves. 
Leaping to one or other side of the trench, they endeavoured 
to make their way along the firmer margin; but there was 
seldom much room there, so after a struggle that displaced 
or scattered their packs, down they inevitably plunged, and 
continued their floundering in the mire. In riding it was 
the same thing; no power or skill could keep one’s horse 
in the. narrow, slimy track. So at least I found it, and by 
the end of the day my knees were one mass of bruises, 


2 


4 
Yr 
174 FORT EDMONTON TO CHAP, XII 


from cannoning off the fir stems, when Rowland made 
sudden dashes for the bank,or attempted to rush into some 
opening where the trees grew wide enough apart to allowa 
passage for himself, though none for his rider's limbs. 

My arms were worn-out from carrying the rifle, without 
support, during such long-continued exertions—‘Quite ex- 
hausted .... tired, and\disgusted at the small progress 
we are Miaking..... Thank God, however, I am in good 
health; and cannot remember having yet yielded to fatigue, 
or allowed anything but reason or sport to prevent me from 
pressing forward. If ever I get home I shall know how to 
appreciate comfort. ,. Still, health is better than comfort.’ 
"That évening J read with particular pleasure some articles 
in the North British Review, of which I had lately got a few 
numbers at one of the forts. [I believe intellectual reading, 
in moderation, to be a rest for the body after hard labour: 
it seems to act as a counter-irritant, drawing off fatigue from 
. the muséles to the brain.] 

While passing. through a sandy place, where the fir- tree 
roots’ ran near to the surface of the ground, Matheson’s 
horse happened to disturb a wasp’s nest ;—then such a scene 
“began! Frantic with, terror, the horses rushed hither and 
thither ; Wawbee, maddest of all, galloped wildly up and 
down, lashing out at the enraged insects. Poor Matheson, in 
desperation, sprung from his uneasy saddle, but, lighting on 
a sharp-pointed stump, slipped, and rolled under his horse’s 
feet,—the animal instantly set-to to kick at its fallen rider, 
fortunately never striking his head; though missing “80 
narrowly as to graze one of his cheeks. We were laughing 
too much to help him; but he §o00n escaped, and’ we all 
-got off without visible damage, though, several of the horses 
must have been badly stung. 


fA 


CHAP. XI. THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS, 175 


Cardinal, while” out shooting alone, killed a skunk, and 
brought it into camp that evening. I afterwards saw it 
roasting whole over the Troquois’ 
fire, looking “awfully hideous, rob- 
bed of its skin and ears, and shorn 
of the bushy tail which in lifé had 
added something to its beauty. 

August 25th.— As a matter of 
curiosity I had a hind-leg of the 
skunk for breakfast.* It tasted like 
sucking-pig; very white, soft, and 
fat, but there was a suspicion of 
skunkiness about it that prevented me 


from finishing the plateful+ SKUNK ROASTING. 

‘On resuming our march the road was bad fora while, then 
came a great stretch of really fine old forest, consisting of 
spruce firs and a few immense poplars. The largest trees 
were not above eight or ten feet round, I should think, but all 
were from 150 to 200 feet high, or more. _ 

‘Shot three “ partridges,” with my rifle, at thirty, ten, and_. 
fifteen yards, hitting all of them in the neck, as I intended. 
"We crossed the M‘Leod river, after which I bathed and dined. 
It is a stream from 100 to 150 yards wide hereaboutg ; for 
the most part shallow and rapid, with a gravelly bed but 
muddy banks, the mud of a lightish brown, as in all these 


* See extract from Hearne, p. 136, anée. 
+ Let me here, once for all, deprecate censure from fastidious readers, in 


regard to the minuteness of my gastronomic details. No question is more 
frequently asked of the traveller, than—-What is such and such a beait, bird, 
or fish fit, for as an article of food? Being able, through my careful note- 
keeping, to meet, in some degree, the general wish for this sort of information, 
ought 1~0 considerate critic!—to deprive the many of a boon, out of 
deference to the probable or possible objections of the few ? 

Xx 


| Py 


176 FORT EDMONTON TO CHAP, XIL 


rivers. The banks, wooded to the water’s edge, are rather 
low, though in some places rising to a greater elevation. 

‘The Iroquois and his family are travelling with us. His 
wife is a good-looking, clear-skinned, black-haired, French 
half-breed, too flat in her proportions like all her race. Her 
dress is of dark blue cloth. She and the girl ride astride, of 
course, but quite modestly, wrapping up their legs in the 
, Shawls in which they carry the httle children. . 

‘The wife rides a very pretty grey-and-white pied mare, 
with two bells round its neck, which make a pleasant rural 
sound ; these are not mere ornaments, but are meant to scare 

“away wolves, and very: generally. do so. Mares areggeldom 

~ or never ridden in this country, except by women» There are 

“Snore geldings than stallions, though the latter are far from 
uncommon,’ - 

After dinner we crossed the Wolf River, a moderate-sized, 
rapid streain runnifg into the M‘Leod ; and subséquently the 
road, which led us up the course of the latter stream, ran 
dnostly through a wood of some age, and was here and there 
intersected by very steeply-banked gullies. . 

A thunderstorm came on, and gave us a wetting before we 
reached our camping-ground at a place called Brazeau’s Cache; 

the storm then settled into steady rain, which: 
continued for most of the night. f 
Our party at supper was increased by two of 
the Jasper’s House men, whom we Met on their 
way to the settlements, they turned ack , however, 
and camped with us. One of them wore a wooden 
spur of the most primitive construction,—merely 
a piece of fir pointed at one end, and hollowed at 
wooven stun. the other to receive the heel, to which it was tied 
by two thin strips of leather. I got some “sheep” pemmican 


guar. x | THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. t17 
from these hunters, and thought it yery. good,—rather sweeter, 
and perhaps a little richer, than the common buffalo pem- 
mican ; 3 it was entirely made fom the dried flesh of the wild. 
mountain sleep, 

-The Iroquois family still accompanied us—‘It sounds \ 
curious at night to hear a baby crying, so,far away in the 
heart of the wilderness.’ 

August 26th—Made a. late start®—to give the bushes time 

-to dry after the heavy rain, wet being most damaging to 
saddle-bags and all other leathern articles, 

“Very feverish all this morning, but two cups of tea at 
diriner did me a great deal of good Tea is a wonderful 
restorative—when taken as by us, without milk, and with no 
spirituous liquors in our systems. 

_ ‘Our march all day was up the M‘Leod River. For 
nearly the whole distance the banks were very high, and 
covered with tolerably large pines; here and there were pre- 
cipitotis faces of rock and clay. Towards evening we crossed 

‘apid stream flowing into the Jarger river, which makes a 
sudden bend at that place. As we moved round the curve _ 
along the water-edge, the setting sun poured floods of light 
on the russet brown masses of scorched pines, on the one 
_ Side, while, on the other, the darkly.green young spruces 

we - looked black in shadow. 

«Just beforé, I had been struck with admiration at the 
sombre loveliness caused by the streaming of the sun’s rays 
through a great stretch of burnt pine forest. ‘All the tall 
trees were standing up like jet black masts, and the glorious 

~ light gleamed like silver on the quivering surface of the river, 

gilded the sable stems wherever it touched them, and played 

in dancing spots over the long grass, and on the low under- 

growth of poplars—destined in course of years to fill the 
ne x 


t 


178 sFORT EDMONTON TO CHAP, XIL 


place of the for-ever blighted wood. I wish some painter 
had been there, to paint what I so vainly attempt to describe. 
Never have I seen such an effect represented in art—. 
withered and dead trees often, but not these scorched, and 
charred, and blackened stenis.’ ~ . oy 

Soon after leaving this beautiful scene, we camped on 
an opening a few acres in size—here regarded as an exten- 
‘ sive plain. The mountains ought now to have been in view, 
but there was a mist over them, and they were entirely hidden. 

August 2'7th—A long hard march this morning, one of 
the most toilsome we had yet had. It rained more or less 
the whole time, and the wind was cold ; the road ran mostly 
through deep wet bogs, full of small fir-trees. My knees and 
legs were severely bruised by awkward Rowland’s dashes among 

ie trees ; in one place he got mired, and I had to Jump off 
and wade through depths of moss. The road was perpetually 
crossing ravines, up and down the steepest hills,—I wondered 
the horses could climb them. 

‘One solitary gleam of consolation enlivened this weary 
day—an unexpected, far-distant view of two grand peaks of 
the Rocky Mountains; over which a thunder-cloud cast a 
solemn, leaden shade. It was but an imperfect view, but so 
marvellous was the contrast between the damp, confined 
darkness of our track through the dripping fir-trees, and the 
sudden freedom of an open sky bounded only by magnifi- 
cent mountain-forms, that for a moment I was quite over- 
whelmed. ‘hen one of those strange tides of emotion that 
transcend both control and ° ‘atialysis, rushed through me 
from head to foot,—I trembled all over—my limbs lost their 
strength, I could hardly’ ‘sit on my horse. He, poor beast, did 
not share in his rider’s excitement— as in a momentary fancy 
I thought he would,—and seemed no happier than before ; 


8 


+¢ 


-of the impetuous cur- 


* 
CHAP. XII. THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 179 


but, for my own part, all weariness vanished away, and 
I felt myself ready for any labours “that might bring me 
nearer to so splendid a goal. 

In course of the morning ye made our second crossing 
of the M‘Leod, and not long afterwards we crossed one of its 
tributaries, a stream about half its size, called the Riviére 
d’Embarras, or Lying-wood River, whose banks in this vicinity 
were broken by steep, low-rocks, resembling in character those 
at Guy’s Cliff near Warwick. Whisky looked funnier than 
ever in his passage . 
through the shallow 
stream, half wading 
half swimming, with 
his fat sides bent into 
an arch by the weight 


rent, and his odd little 
stump of a tail up- 
pointed to the skies, flirting bright * ‘water about like a sea- 
god’s shell in a fountain. [Poor Whisky filled the place 
of the ancient domestic jester; onelook at him dispelled 
melancholy ; every movéinent he made was a farce. With his 
cunningly timorous countenance and sleekly rounded ple- 
beian body, he was a true Sancho Panza of dogs. He was 
a daily delight: I would not have exchanged him for the 
best dog in the Company’s territories.] It was a good deal 
past our usual dinner-time when we halted near a small 
camp of half-breed hunters, who hospitably presented us 
with some wild raspberries they had just been gathering. 
‘The clouds blew off, and the day became sunny and very 
pleasant. I rode forward as usual with old Antoine, and 
presently, arriving at the brow of a hill that overhangs the 


"Ns 


WHISKY, » 


” 


4% 


_ 
_ 
180 . ' FORT EDMONTON TO ‘CuAY. XII. 


—_——— 


Embarras, a glorious sight opened upon my view—the Rocky 
Mountain range, stretching along the horizon far as the eye 
could reach. Below us rolled the river among dark pines ; 
hills, also covered with pines—some black and scorched with 
fire, some green and flourishing,—filled up the prospect for 
many miles; then came flat bare eminences, “the footstools 
of the loftier range, and then uprose the mountains themselves, 
rugged in form, peaked and tabled, and scored with gashes, 
—not magnified hills, but rocks in the very archetype. 
Too remote to display any smaller modulations; they rose 
flat against the blue sky, themselves all steeped in a soft 
mellow grey from summit to base ; but in certain ravines, and 
on some of the high shoulders of the greater peaks, spots 
and masses of snow glittered in the sun, or looked cold as 
death where no rays were able to reach them. 

‘With feelings almost too deep for utterance, I furned to 
Antoine, hoping to find in him some sympathetic response. 
His eyes gleamed and sparkled as they met mine; with a 
pleasant smile he pointed first to the nearer hills, then to the 
grand range that stretched far away beyond : “Monsieur Mi- 
lord,” said he, with impressive earnestness, “ il ny a pas des 
moutons ici ;—mais la bas—ah!!” 

‘Taking a rough piece of paper from my pocket, I made a 
hasty sketch of the principal peaks, after which we rejoined 
the men, and then all descended to the Embarras and crossed 
it again. From this, half-an-hour’s riding brought us to a 
glade where three or four Iroquois and half-breed hunters were 
encamped with their families, and there we halted, in the hope 
of getting horses and other things that were required. Tents 
being pitched, I walked a mile or two, expecting to see the moun- 
tains again from a different point, but owing to the nature of 


_the ground I could only discern the tops of a few lofty peaks. 


THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS, FROM THE EMBARRAS RIVER. 


‘See p 180} 


ow 


CHAP. XII. THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. + 1st 


‘Moose at supper: excellent though rather tough ; the fat 
delicious. How one longs for a good larder and an educated 
cook!’ . 

Sunday, August 28th—The night was intensely cold ; 
hoar frost covered all the ground, some water in a basin was 
frozen nearly half-an-inch thick; but the heat became too 


‘great after the sun got fairly up, and poured down his power- 


ful rays into the sheltered valley. 

At dinner I was presented with another new dish, in the 
form of the last joints of a beaver’s back-bone.—‘ Exquisite : 
tender white lean, melting fat, like sucking-pig but better, 
without the least over-richness of taste, and free from the 


~ painful suspicions which interfere with the enjoyment of 


roast skunk,’ 

I afterwards rode to the point whence my previous sketch 
of the mountain had been taken, and made a more careful 
drawing of the same subject: There was a haze over the 
mountains themselves, though the sky was cloudless elsewhere ; 
the obscurity, however, being only partial, I got in their general 
features pretty accurately, notwithstanding the bad quality 
of the materials I had to work with. 

‘The wife of one of the hunters has made me a gun-cover 
of moose leather, ornamented with fringes and narrow braidings 
of red and black cloth, after the picturesque fashion of the 
country.’ [It was the custom to keep one’s gun covered, except 
when wanted for immediate use. This protected it from bad _ 
weather, and kept. it ‘from injury when carried across the © 
saddle. My Fort Garry cover was merely of buffalo skin, 
which, being little better than wash-leather, was néither strong 
enough for mountain work, nor thick enough in continuous 
rain, Duncan and Toma, who carried my smooth-bores after 
we left the carts behind us, had only common waterproof 


189 FORT EDMONTON TO CHAP, XII 


covers, but the stuff gradually wore into holes, and the guns 
suffered a little from want of protection.] 

‘These hunters are fine-looking men ; dressed either in the 
usual fringed leather hunting-shirts, or in -blue cloth capots. 
Their caps are of blue cloth, small, ‘with a leather shade, and 
covered with streamers of ribbon, chiefly black, blue, and red. 

‘They have large herds of ‘excellent horses—ponies we 
should call them at home,—among them several stallions. 
One pretty brown pony passedi us, carrying a little girl five 
or six years old, who was riding: quite alone. Near one of 
the tents I saw two girls, of much the same age, cleaning a 
beaver-skin with a bone, while two others were cutting up fat 
with great knives, Think of that, A— and C—!’ 

The baby of our fellow-traveller Pierre, the Troquois, was 
taken ill at night, and the father, in great anxiety, sent 
John M‘Kay to ask me to come and give it medicine. I 
went immediately to see the little patient. Its mother sat 
crying at the tent door in front of a wretched fire, holding 
the child nearly naked on her lap, and her husband leant 
over her with miserable looks, and eyes all full of tears. 
An old woman crouched near them in silence. . 

I felt very sorry for them, and hoped that Heaven would 
enable me to do their child some good. It seemed probable it 
had got a chill in the frosty nights we had lately been having ; 
for it was dry and feverish, and inclined to sickness, though - 
there was no diarrheea ; and I began to consider how one 
might best help nature, ‘while soothing the parents by some 
show of active measures. I dared not give medicine, knowing 
that pills and powders fit for men might kill a ten-month 
baby,—fearing, besides, lest if the child died I should be held 
by these untaught people the cause of its death, according to 
a Prevalent Indian fancy. 


CHAY. XII. THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 183 


After a moment’s thought I put on an air of decision, and 
desired that the fire should be made as large as possible, and 
the poor naked child very closely wrapt up in several Shawls 
‘ and blankets. These orders were obeyed with some signs 
of reviving cheerfulness, and Mackay presently returned from 
our camp bringing a pot of weak tea, which I had sent him 
to get ready. 

I then directed the mother to hold her baby close to the 
fire, and pour tea down its throat, as much as it could be 
made to swallow. With perfect confidence-in my skill, she - 
took a spoon and began the feeding process, which so greatly 
disgusted the child, that it struggled and screamed, and 
rejected the tea, till, between its own efforts and the heat 
of the blazing logs, a little moisture began to appear. Tell- 
ing them to keep the baby warm, as they valued its life, 
I left them and returned to, my tent, and next morning 
had the happiness of hearing that the treatment had been 
a complete success. 

‘ After nightfall there was a most beautiful’ aurora ; some- 
times like a tent, with streams proceeding earthwards in 
every direction from a fixed central point, sometimes like 
a very grand_arch’ stretching from east to west through 
Arcturus, Vegi Oygnus, and the neighbouring stars. Then it 
became a mass of glowing red, spreading over the eastern side of 
the heavens, and gradually passing to the south. Old Antoine 
said that he had never seen an aurora in the south before. 


The Indians believe these lights: to be the spirits of men... 


dancing in the sky,’ 

August | 29th.—This morning was occupied in buying and 
_ exchanging horses. We bartered a Sharp's rifle belonging to 
Mackay for a strong three-year-old black horse, and ex- 
changed La Framboise, who was nearly done out, for a good 


~ 


nN 


184 FORT EDMONTON TO omar. xz. 


skewbald ; we also gave £12, with a Company’s horse, which 
was temporarily lame and unable to go on, to one of the 
hunters, named Eneas Oneanti, in exchange for a very hand- 
some stallion, black, flecked with grey, and with a few small 
spots of white. Half his face, his nose, and his legs, were also 
white. This pony stood about fourteen hands high ; he was 
seven years old, and a perfect model of strength and com- 
pactness. They called him “Coi-fesse,” which was said to 
mean “spotted thigh,” but disliking this ugly word I named 
him “Jasper,” as he belonged to the Jasper’s House district. 
When first I saw him he was wandering with a herd of 
very handsome little marés, about twenty of them roaming 
freely together in the glades of the beautiful pine forest. 

‘From Oneanti we also got a fine old white mare named 
“Moutonne,” in exchange for Bleu. She is twenty years old, 
—but that counts for nothing here, and she is as fresh and 
active as a filly: Her,right haunch shows a terrible scar, 
large and deep enough to hold both one’s hands, made by the. 
wolves when she was young. 

‘When these arrangements were finished we set out, but 
before we.had gone far, Eneas came riding up to complain of 
the bargain about the mare, as hé found Bleu a less good 
riding-horse than he had supposed. He wanted the little 
cream-colour instead. 

‘After explaining to him that I felt no way bound to yield 
anything, especially as he himself had proposed the exchange, 
I told-him that I would let him have the horse he wanted— 
which he knew all about—rather than leave him dissatisfied 
with my dealings, He hesitated a little, then jumped off Bleu 
- and changed the saddle to the other. Poor Créme looked 
meek and sorrowful, and his éyes appeared (as I have seen a 
wounded doe ’s) all suffused with tears. He is a soft, weak- 


c aT 
in 


OWA. XI. ' THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 185 


‘spirited little horse, with beauty and gentleness for his only 
merits. As he seemed ill, he had been spared as much as 
possible since we left Si. Ann. Poor fellow! he seemed to 
have sad forebodings of rough treatment and hard work in 
store; and looked so piteously that I felt quite unhappy. 
However, there is little scope for sentiment when travelling 
through these wildernesses : horses must bd got, and if the bad 
ones cannot be exchanged they must go on till they drop,— 
such is the law of the position. 

‘The Iroquois and his pretty wife were still following us, 
- though moving at a slower pace, and it was proposed to make 
an early halt, evidently to let. them come up. Iwas told that 
this was the last open spot, that then came a bad muskeg, ete., 
but after cross-questioning M'Kay and Antoine I determined 
to proceed, not finding it satisfactory to travel with other 
people, for, as in the present case, it tended to shorten the 
marches, and otherwise interfered with my arrangements. 
Besides, instead of my men sitting all sociably round the 
fire when we halted at night, some of them had begun to go 
to their new friends—more especially those who talked 
Indian,—so that my party was in danger of splitting 
into sections, , . ; 

_ “We marched accordingly ;- and, as I had guessed, soon 
passed by several fair camping places,—the muskeg being a 
very small one,—and, after two hours’ work, halted in an 
excellent place beside the river. During the march I shot 
three wood-grouse with the rifle, cutting off the heads of two 
of them.: We crossed the Embarras ten times. 

‘Took my first ride on Jasper, and found him very quiet, 
‘sure-footed, and strong, but lazy. Catching sight of my 
shooting boots, he could not be happy till he had turned round 
and touched them, with his nose (never having seen anything 


186 : FORT EDMONTON TO) | omar. xt. 


but moccasins before), after which he paid thein no further 
attention. We picketed him and Moutonne to-night, lest 
they should try to return to their old quarters. 

‘Beaver tail for supper—like pork fat sandwiched between 
layers of Finnan haddock: \ 4 

August 30th. A bitterly cold night; in no way could I 
manage'to shut out the keen frost and keep myself tolerably 
warm. Our start was early, and by dinner-time we had crossed 
the Embarras six times more; it was never. deeper, however, - 
than to wet one’s foot when riding a, fourteen-hand, pony. 

We passed rapidly through many a glade of fine grass, 
amidst the masses of young and middle-aged fir-wood, but 
there were also numerous muskegs to encounter. Jasper was 
an admirable horse for this work. He cared nothing for 
muskegs, however deep and bad ; even when sinking in a 
swamp he would take the opportunity fo snatch a bite of grass 
if his nose got near enough. the surface. Greediness was 
one of his faults. Sometimes, while drawing himself over a 
log, he would stop half-way, and begin eating a tempting — 
mouthful that happeried to lic handy. He was very gentle 
and quiet ; I never knew him fidgetty, except once, when a 

_ Wasp stung him. ’ 
“We crossed the ‘Embarras no less than thirty-one times 
after dinner,—thirty-seven times in all during the day,—as we 
threaded the, winding course of the river, going up its deep and 
narrow valley. The hills on each side were becoming steeper, 
higher, and more rugged, though still pine-covered to the top. 

There was a slight thunderstorm, but on the whole it had 
been a fine day. We came upon the tracks of a moose, but 
neither saw the animal itself, ior game of any sort,—except 
wood-grouse, of which I shot two with the rifle, decapitat- 
ing one of the pair. 


CHAP. XU. THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 187 


August 31st—Crossed the Embarras three or four times 
more, then finally left it, and struck across hills covered with 
wdll-grown pines, and valleys obstructed by deep bogs, passing 
also through several large openings, mostly of a, very swampy 
character. Old camps and other traces of the Assiniboines 
were numerous,—which quite accounted: for the scarcity of 
game in the district. We now again came to the.M‘Leod 
River,—about forty yards wide, shallow and rapid ; and parted 
there from one of the Iroquois (not our old friend Pierre, but 
a'hunter of the same band), who had for the last day or two 
accompanied us,—our ways diverging, his destigation being” 
Jasper’s House, while we proceeded up stream by fthe shortest 
road to the mountains. 


able growth ; there ¥ were very good spruces and firs, but they 
had been terribly spoilt by the Indians, who ha less, _ 
barked them to extract the sap. 

‘Before dinner I rode Jasper, who sailed like a strong/ship 
through the bogs ; in the afternoon, Cendré,—much refreshed 
by the long:rest I have given him. 

‘This morning’s work has been very severe for our horses, 
the fallen trees on the steep hill-sides being so numerous, and 
often so large, that progress was slow and toilsome. It is 
amusing to watch the different horses going over the great 
trunks, some jumping, while others creep and scramble. Old 
Lagrace, as usual, has a way of his own—he stands on the 
trees, and makes his horse leap them by hauling at Him witha 
line.’. He has decorated his white flannel cap with a strip of 
scarlet cloth, which presents a most imposing appearance. 

‘This evening the men started the plan of two separate 
camp fires—for the first time: - I disapprove of this arrange- 


es 


188 FORT ERMONTON TO ROCKY MOUNTAINS. — cnap, xn. 


ment, because it either breaks up the party into sections, or 
else they all go to one of the fires, which is naturally that 
ithest from my tent, so that I am left alone, and a stronger 
line of demarcation is drawn between me and my people. I 
hope to put things right without much difficulty, by manner 
rather than words. . 
’ ¢The Saskatchewan men have not added to the workability 


- of ahe party, though good enough men in themselves. [There 


was not @uite the same orderly and cordial spirit that existed 
before their arrival] Last Saturday I had to find fault 


‘decidedly, because, in order to keep ‘up with the free-men, 
M‘Kay hurried over breakfast and started the men before I 


was ready. He took my reproof admirably, and has been 


‘doubly attentive ever since. I believe it was a fault of 


inadvertency.’ 


[After hesitating whether or not to suppress this and one - 


or two similar entries in my journal, I have determined to 
leave them: partly, because they seemed so important at the 
time that their omission would impair the faithfulness of the 
narrative ; partly, beciise I am glad of opportunities to show 
that my praises of the excellent fellows who accompanied me 


' are not empty panegyrics, but that I can plainly state all, or 


nearly all, of the few and trivial instances in’ which I had 


reason for dissatisfaction with them, during the many months. 


we travelléd together over the prairie fd the mountain.] 


ih 


\ 


} 


I noth ee aD 


CHAPTER XIIL 
MEDICINE TENT RIVER AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS. 


SEPTEMBER ist.—After breakfast’ Antoine and I rode for- 
ward together up the MLeod valley, and crossed the river a 
dozen times at least. The mountains now appeared close in 
front of us. One of them particularly struck me from its 
resemblance to Arthur’s Seat, near Edinburgh ; it was similar 
in shape, and apparently in formation, though on a greatly 


_ Inagnified scale. There was no snow upon’ it, even-in the » 


higher regions, except afew streaks about the nérthern face. 

‘As we were riding past a deep pool as clear as crystal, 
at the foot of a low but rugged crag, old Antoine paused and 
eyed it attentively,—admiring its beauty T hoped,—and 
almast believed, on seeing him stop again and gaze even more 
attentively at another rock and pool a little farther on. He 
has some sense of the beautiful, after <all, said I to myself. 
“Milord!” said he, “Jes petits poissons : and injymediately 
began to make a rough fishing rod.’ 

We rejoined the rest of the party, then all halted for 
dinner, in the midst of noble scenery, and while the horses 
grazed among the scattered rocks and fir-trees, and the men 
smokedl and chatted good-humouredly together, I passed: a 
very pleasant hour in reading “ Macbeth.” 

Continuing our march up the M‘Leod, we presently 
entered ‘a fine rocky gorge, bef#éeen the “Arthur’s Seat” 
mountain and another of less remarkable appearance, and 


eee, 


row) 


\ 


190 MEDICINE TENT RIVER CHAP. XII: 


after a few miles of easy travelling, reached a’ oint where 
a smaller stream flowed into the river in a. succession of 
picturesque cascades. Our track now diverged,.and “passed - 
up the course of the stream and close besidé the waterfalls ; 
it was an unfrequented road, and we" found it a good deal 
blocked with brush, and altogether out of order ; but/a little 
‘axe work soon cleared away the impediments, and we made. 
the ascent without accident. 

‘At the top of the rapids the valley showed a tamer, 
character, its sides being comparatively low and covered with | 
grass and young pines; nevertheless there were fine distant 

\ views at intervals, and when we camped for the night in a 
“deep glen that intersected our course, a grand rocky peak 
could be seen crowning thé énd of the ravine we had chosen 
for our halting place. We made an enormoug,fire of logs— 
the men had taken my hint, there was but one fire *—and 
slept well in spite of the keenness of the frost. Nothing 
could exceed the’ beauty of the ‘pines and firs as displayed by 
the light of our flaming pyramid, even the grass showed a 
strange ruddiness mingled with its quief green, and the eyes 
of the horses wandering on the banks above us, shone like 
little stars rising and setting incessantly amidst deepest 
shades.’ 

September 2d.—A cold frosty night,.as was now ; almost 
always the case. .We continued our march up the stream of 
the cascades ; its banks were no longer steep, but had become 
very tame and featureless. In one pool we surprised a family 
of black diving ducks, and managed to get three or four of 
them, which tured out particularly good eating, almost the 
best of their kind I ever tasted. 

* In a few days.we returned to the two-fire Plan, finding it} more ‘ore contenient 
as the weather grew colder. _ 


\ . L . . 
t - . 4 , 


CHAP. XIII. AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS. 191 


“ 


- After this. we observed eighteen wild sheep on the shoulder 
‘of a mountain on our sight, so—directing athe “brigade” to 
a a "valley which contained a certain - small lake,—Antoine, 
M‘Kay, and J, rode off to the foot of the hill where the animals 
had just been seen. Leaving our horses, we-proceeded to 
. climb the rotks,. “but the sheep _had disappeared, probably 
" scared by our party, which was full in sight though a con- 
siderable distance away. 

‘When high among the precipices we ‘heard some “siffleurs” 
whistling with their clear, bell-like, ‘melanclioly notes, and 
presently saw one, but out of shot.) This beast, a kind of 
marmot, is considerably less than a ‘badger, though not unlike 
one in form and colour; its tail, however, i is larger and its fur 
finer, in these respects it more resembles the opossum. Its 
teeth are very long, and shaped like those of the beaver or 

rabbit. The rocks are its abode: probably it nearly answers 
to the “coney” of the Book of Proverbs.* 

"We also saw some very preity ground-squirrels, not so 
large as a common rat; they were striped with yellow on 3 
greenish grey, and bad’ bushy tails about half the length of 
‘their bodies. Their cry is like the chirping of a bird. I did 
not shoot one, as my rifle bullet would have cut so small a 
creature into atoms, 

Having got our horses again, we climbed along the 
mountain-side, on tracks where I should have thought nothing 
‘but-a goat could pass, and then descended fo the lake, where 
the brigade had now already arrived. On our way we observed 


* Arctomys? Pruinosus. The Whistler. The Hoary Marmot—Pennant. 
Quisquis- -su-—Cree Indians. Souffepr [Sifleur] or Mountain Badger-—Fur- 
traders. _. Mr. Macpherson describes one. . , killed on the Mackenzie River. 

. It was 274 inches long, of which the head 2}, and the tail 83.” Ricnarp- 
son, Fawn. Bor.-Am., vol. i. p. 150. 


iN 


a 


. 


1 


192 MEDICINE TENT RIVER «  -< omar. xii. 


a “white sheep” (mountain goat) -high up on the opposite 
‘crags, and, after leaving our horses at the camp, went in 
search of him, but: Fiad a much longer walk and harder 
climb than I had expected. At length we came to within a 
very lone shot of where he was lying, close to a sharp turn 
among the rocks, and I crawled on alone, bringing myself ‘a 
third of the way nearer,—after a most painful stalk, for the 
stones cut like knives. An exceedingly careful approach 

brought me to a stone about 120 yards from him, but'I could 
~ get no nearer: then I fired at him as he lay—for if he had 
risen he would have been out of sight in a moment,—and 
had the satisfaction of making a clean miss. 

No better sport remaining, we began to roll immense 
stones down the steep—a favourite amusement with my men, 
both’ young and old delighting in it——sending them crashing 
into a grove of small-sized fir-trees, which snapped like twigs 
at the stroke of the flying boulders. Then, getting caught in. 
a shower, we madé the best of our way back to camp, and 
reached home about nightfall: 

‘There we found that Munroe had shot a siffleur ; and, for 
the first time, I had the pleasure of eating that most delicious 
meat, which tastes like very delicate mutton, with-the fat of 
a sucking-pig.’ 

September 3d¢.—‘ The camp is surrounded with magnificent 
rocky heights; I leave it with sorrow. Would that it were 
the beginning of summer instead of the end! Hada hind-leg 
of siffleur for breakfast, and find it the best part. In shape 
and distribution of fat it is a miniature haunch of venison 3 
it is possible to eat the whole at a meal’ . 

When we set out, Whisky took possession of the siffleur’s 
head, carrying it face-foremost in the most ridiculous manner, 
with its.rabbity teeth sticking out in front of his own, and 


: EPRI 
MIRA todas wh 8 ” ‘ : 
INSTITUTE. oo 


MOUNT LINDSAY—NEAR MEDICINE TENT RIVER. (See p. 193.) 


te 


CHAP. xr. AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS, 193 


trotted beside us, exhibiting his*treastre with a delightfully 
amusing air of self-camplacent sagacity. 

After crossing a river which runs in a southerly direction, 
[we believed it to be a branch of the “North River,” as my 
men called it, which is a head-water of the North Saskatchewan, 
—possibly that'termed “ Brazeau River” in some of the maps], 
we ascended a hill, and, on gaining the top of it, came to a 
small stream flowing with rapid current towards the west. - I 
walked on alone in front of my party, following the course of 


this rivulet, and suddenly found myself stopped: by a rocky a 


barrier, through which the water rushed, partly in cascades, 
partly through a very deep and narrow gorge. On the banks 
above this place I picked up some specimens of fossil shells ; 
then climbing the hill to my left I rejoined the brigade, 
having first made a sketch of a magnificent snow-crowned 
mountain directly opposite, on the farther side of a rather 
considerable stream which receives the little brook I had 
just been following, a stream which, according to Antoine, is 
called the “Medicine Tent River,” and forms one of the 
principal head-waters of the river Athabasca. 

‘To descend into its valley we had to go down a hill of 
extraordinary steepness. It was barely practicable for the 
pack-horses, but we reached the bottom without accident, and 
then pursued our way up the river with the mysterious name. 
At dinner-time I made a very hurried sketch of a noble 
mountain of black slaty rock, the last on the right as we 
descended the hill of difficulty, but unfortunately clouds came 
down and covered the curiously cloven mitre-like summit, 
which formed its most characteristic feature, before I had 
time to seize the exact outline.* . 


* This wild and beautiful mountain I have named Mount Lindsay, after 


my friend Sir Coutts Lindsay, Bart., of Balearres. 
- i8) 


: . 


194 MEDICINE TENT RIVER CHAP, XUIT. 


‘We continued our march up the river amidst scenery of 
surpassing magnificence. On the left, as one proceeds, the 
heights are less grand, running more in a plain continuous 
ridge, but on the right there is a far higher wall of rock, 
which is broken by a succession of glorious peaks, wi 


MOUNTAIN IN MEDICINE TENT va Ley, 
/ 


‘ 


lower precipitous spurs, divided by deep rocky, glens, run out~ 
wards to the river, ~ / , 
‘Among the loftier mountains thie most are pyramidal ; a 
few are more rounded in form ; some are decorated with great 
magses of snow glittering on their/northern sides ; others are 
utterly unclothed except upon their grassy pine-clad feet ; but. 
all agree in one thing—they are/rock, absolute rock, without 
admixture of other ‘substanc¢d, Sometimes the rocks are 
placed in steep piles one above the other, like heaps of 


CHAP. XHT. AND NORTH RIVER GAMPS. 195 


gigantic slates, far oftener they are disposed in a succession 
of rugged precipitous ridges. Sometimes wide tracts are 
covered with shingly fragments, sometimes the strata whirl 
in such curious fashion, that far-spreading spaces look like 
vast stores of petrified trees upheaved in the ruin of a dis- 
mantled world, ; 

‘The rivers are shallow and rapid, rushing over pebbly 
beds ; they are generally clear,bué of an opaque green or 
muddy brown when the snow is melting fast. Their banks 


are bordered by wide belts of pine-trees,—chiefly Scotch and * 


silver firs, but not without a sprinkling of spruces. These 
trees are small, being kept down by the cold and by frequent 
avalanches of snow or stones; except a few gnarled old 
patriarchs, none are larger than an ordinary fir of thirty 
years’ growth. ' . 

‘In the afternoon ‘we passed through the ruins of a 
subordinate mountain, which had fallen as if shivered by 
lightning, and covered hundreds of acres with shattered rocks 
broken into the most fantastic forms, 

‘The changes of temperature are very ‘sudden’ in: these 
elevated valleys: At noon we were hiding from the burning 
sun in any shade that could be found, in the evening we were 
_ trembling in the icy wind of a premature winter :—but there 
are no mosquitoes, so welcome cold, heat, wind, rain, fog, 
anything, if only these tormentors are cut off! 

—‘Our camp was placed on a hillside, looking down 
on a small lake, and within sight and sound of a water- 
fall. We were well supplied with food. My own supper 
was chiefly composed of porcupine,—Kline having killed 
one of these animals with a stick,—it was like siffleur, but 
too rich and fat. Old Lagrace had brought in a large 
. “partridge,” a bird of the size and appearance of a grey- 


me 


‘ 


Jo 


196 MEDICINE TENT RIVER CHAP. XIII. 


hen,* which he knocked off a branch with a stone, and - 
Antoine had _been out on the mountains and shot a female 
wild sheep,’ 

‘Sunday, September ‘Ath, —-Mist came rolling up the valley, 
the night grew bitterly cold : I pulled a blanket over my head, 
but could still feel the’ icy air striking sharply on my face ; 
then I burrowed among three blankets and heaped all my 
clothes upon them, and managed to get a little sleep, but it 
was not till the sun rose that I found myself at all comfortable. 
For breakfast, this:morning, had roast ribs of sheep—a better’ 
flavoured meat than common mutton. 

After dinner, I set out with M‘Kay, M‘Beath, Duncan, and 
Antoine, and climbed to the top of the mountain that stands 
across the end of the ‘valley. It was hard work, the exces- 
sively steep slopes being covered with loose shingle which 
yielded to our feet, but perseverance at length succeeded, 
and we reached the summit. There was little view, as the 


- mist hung thick over all but a few of the mountains. 


In the valley beneath us we saw a number of wild sheep, 


no rams however, only young males, or females with their 


lambs. 
, Before quitting our elevation we set to work piling up big 


stones, and built a sort of rough tower, or cairn, some six 


feet high, on the highest and most commanding point, as a 
memorial of our visit ; then we descended more quickly than 
was altogether agreeable. 

Whisky, full of misplaced zeal, followed me to the very 
top, advancing with steady steps, though much more slowly 
than we did; but in returning he got daunted by the perils. 

* Probably the female of the Dusky Grouse—(Zetrao Obscurus). RICHARD- 
son,-Faun. Bor.-Am., vol. ii. p. 844. The female is nineteen inches long,— 


much the size of the female Black-cock, which i it also seems to resemble in 
plumage. 


CHAP. XII. AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS, 197 


of the way, and began to show signs of alarm, stopping with 
’ bewildered looks when he came to the dangerous descents, 
then creeping a step or two forward, but so lingeringly, that, 
by the time we were half-way down, he looked a mere black 
speck in the upper region, where our new monument was 


standing in all its pride. 

Lagrace came into camp soon after, bringing a large 
porcupine which he and Pointer had secured between .them. 
That unlucky dog, having followed it by scent, had seized it 
so rashly as to get his mouth struck through with quills, some 
of which took such firm hold that we were unable to draw 
them out. .[Of this animal (Hystria pilosus—The Canada 
porcupine, termed Cawquaw by the Cree Indians), Sir John 
Richardsoa~jrrites—“ Its quills . . . are rough, with 
minute teeth directed backwards. . . . These spines, 
which are detached from the porcupine by the slightest touch, 
and probably by the will of the animal, soon fill the mouths 
of the dogs which worry it, and unless the Indian women, 
carefully pick them out, seldom fail to kill them. Wolves 
occasionally die from the same cause.”—Faun. Bor-Am., vol. 
iL p.‘21415. I suppose that Lagrace, who had taken Pointer 
under his special charge, afterwards succeeded in extracting 
the quills ; at all events, the dog was none the worse of the 
adventure. ] : 

September 5th—Early in the morning, while half asleep 
after a very wakeful and uncomfortable night, MKay roused 
me up, reporting a grisly bear to be in view. Dashing on my 
clothes I started in pursuit, carrying a gun on each shoulder, 
Robinson Crusoe fashion—my rifle for a long shot, and the 
smoothbore with the big bullet for close quarters,—Lagrace 
and Antoine following with other weapons. The bear, how- 
ever, having seen our camp, or perhaps winded it, made off at 


198 MEDIUINE TENT RIVER CHAR. XIU. 


a rapid pace, and, after two hours of fatiguing clunbing in the 
chaos of the landslip, I had to return without the sport I had- 
so fully expected. When on my way home, a siftieur sud- 
denly appeared on a. rock beside me; I shot him dead ; 
mediately a: afterwards, -a very pretty silvery-grey one came 
running past, and met with the same fate as its companion. 
The former was a male, the latter a female ; and both being 
good specimens, I had their skins preserved.* Siffleurs are 
hard to get hold of, for, unless shot, quite dead, they scram- 
ble into their holes like wounded rabbits. 

On arriving at camp, I found the men impatient to set out 
on a sheep-hunt they had been promised for to-day. I - 
breakfasted very hurriedly, intending to go with them; but 
changed my mind, and took a short rest instead,—feeling the 
morning’s work, as I was rather unwell, and in bad walking 
condition. 

Tn half-an-hour, however, I made a start of it, accom- 
panied by Antoine and Duncan,—the latter carrying my 
smoothbore, as I thought it likely to be serviceable,—and 
we went together upa broad valley: that branched to the left 
from that in which onr camp was ‘situated. The men had 
gone in different parties up the surrounding heights ; except 
Munroe, who had taken his own line, preferring a separate 
and more distant beat.  ~ 

It was not long before we observed some sheep,—discover- 
ing three of them among the rocks on the opposite side of a 
deep ravine,—only an old ewe, unluckily, with two yearlings 
at her side. The ewe and a young ram fell at once to my rifle 


* The skin of the male siffleur measures 27} inches from nose to root of 
tail (the tail is rather destroyed) ; that of the female 26 inches, and the tail of 
it 8} inches to the end of the hair. The skin of another specimen measures— 
body 23 inches, tail about 8 inches. 


CHAP, XL AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS, _ “ 199 


shots, and I broke the jaw of the other with the smoothbore ; 

Antoine then knocked it over dead, making a very fine shot 

with his dld flint rifle——a most extraordinary little implement, 

~ so short and small, so bound up and mended with leather and 
brass-headed tacks, and altogether so worn and weather-beaten, 
as to look like some curious antique toy. 

After this, I went to stalk a herd we had perceived some 
little way off, while Antoine remained to watch the ravine. It 
took me a long round to get to the place I was trying for—an 
isolated hillock about sixty yards from the sheep—and when 
I arrived there I shot badly, being dreadfully out of breath. 
However, after missing with both barrels, I had still time 
to load and fire again, the animals being confused, and looking 
about them instead of attempting to escape, and with these 

shots I wounded one ewe severely, and mortally wounded the 
only ram in the herd—a good-sized two-year-old, which, run- 
ning down the ravine, wa met by Antoine, who finished it, 
and shot another ewe besides. 

Tran after the wounded ewe. Adamb was with her ; and, 
wishing to kill it—as an act of mercy, to save it from starva- 
tion—~I waited till it was in line with its mother, and struck 
them both with the same ball. The ewe struggled on some 


_ ' distance, but I overtook’and finished her. Antoine now joined 


me, and we set-to to skin and cut up our sheep, much pleased 
to have obtained so good a supply of fresh meat for the camp. 
He told me, much to my surprise, that my first sheep of all, 
after lying a long time apparently dead, had jumped up 
actively on hearing a shot close by her, and “saved herself” 
up the steep side of the mountain. 
On returning to campyl found that all my people, except 
Muntoe, had come in unsuccessful from the chase: but he 
presently appeared, bringing with him the head of an old ram 


yo “ 
200 MEDICINE’ TENT RIVER CHAP, XWIL 


with very good horns. He had also killed another with a still 
larger head. This was encouraging news, as it showed that 
herds of fine sheep were in the neighbourhood. The old rams 
at this season keep in parties by themselves, and one may 
hunt whole days without_findiiig anything better than bands 
of ewes and.lambs and young males. The head brought in 
by Munroe was so heavy as to be a fair load for a man. 

“Dined off what Toma and Lagrace call “ porty-pig” (pore- 
epte, porcupine). It was boiled to-night—muck better thus 
than roasted,—tasting like rather fat, delicate mutton. 

“Toma, is sometimes very facetious in his quiet, way. 
There was an old’ Indian with the Carlton hunters at Cherry, 
Bush, whom he nicknamed, “ The Saw-mill,” from the,incessant 
jarring drone of his voice as he told endless stories in Cree’ 

~and this name had come to be typically applied to any 
offender of the sort. One of our old hands, lately, was 
droning away at along story about some Indian fight, which 
“he suddenly broke off with a sharp sound, in imitation of the 
“ping” of a closely-passing bullet. Toma softly got up, 
stepped across ‘the fire to where Matheson was sitting, and, 
stooping over him, very gravely said—‘ Saw-mill broke!” 
Matheson went into fits of laughter, and ran all round the place, 
telling everybody of Toma’s sententious-remark.’ ~ 


September 6th.—Having determined to move the camp to - 


another valley, I made a rough sketch of the opposite 
mountains as a remembrance of the scene. This finished, I 
marked my name on a fir-tree, a matter easily accomplished 
by blazing off part of the bark, and drawing the letters on 


the exposed surface with the black end of a half-burnt stick. - 


The resin dries: soon afterwards, and forms a sort of varnish 
which preserves the inscription for years. 
‘The place we are leaving is known as the “Height of 


as 


‘ 
toe 
ten : 
‘ ’ ou 4 
ne : " " 
he : 
s ae 
Me, . 1, 
. aa 
4.) et se 1 
. s a rete 
. ‘sy 
“g 4 . 
a v, 
e- . 
: ooo! 
+ . ‘ 
te . 
; poof } y 
a ff ; 
va toe 
\ . 
4 . 
\ 
\ 


SRS pat 
vi ee " i 
i 


M CAMP IN MEDI SINE TENT VALLEY. 


Hii 
i 
ik i 


hh 
i 
w ‘ Lite 


See p. 2a ) 


vy 


VIEW FR 


ae 


a 


. 


cnar.xrx, | AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS. 201 


Land,” being just where the waters divide,—the Athabasca 
head-stream rising in the snows of a great mountain (which 
stands towards the left in my sketch), and flowing northwards, 
while the North River (I have heard no other name for it) 


-flows southwards, to the north branch of the Saskatchewan,- 


from, a point not far distant. This country is very little 
known. The Iroquois, the Assiniboines, and others, hunt as 


"far as the small lake near which we camped on the 2d,. but, 


strangely enough, they do not traverse the few miles farther, 
which would bring them from where game is scarce and wild, 


to where it abounds and is easy of approach. ‘Perhaps - 


superstitious reasons may keep them away, as the name 
“ Medicine Tent River ” indicates magic and mystery. 

‘lam the first European who has visited this valley, and 
if I might have the geographical honour of giving my name 
. to some spot of earth, I should choose the -mountain -near 
which the two rivers rise.* _ 

‘There seem to be no Indian names in this country for 
even the most remarkable of its features. This is the less 
surprising, as the whole district is only inhabited by a few 
families.of wandering hunters, and they are rapidly decreasing 
in number. 

‘  ¢The mountains seem to be mostly similar In composition 
to the rock formations near Edinburgh ; precipitous walls 
and rocky summits, resembling those of the Salisbury Crags 
and Arthur's Seat, being common, while occasionally there are 
lighter-coloured and lower masses, independent of the others 
though connected with them, which much remind one of the 


* That mountain is perhaps appropriated, being probably visible from the - 


other side; but no one could dispute my claim to the ‘ Height-of-Land” 
eminence, which I have therefore taken leave to designate on the maps by my 
own name, as raiser of the cairn that crowns its summit. 


202 - : MEDICINE TENT RIVER CHAP, XUL 


3ass Rock. The general colouring of the subordinate hills 
and valleys is nearly the same as in the Highlands of Scotland, 
for, although the beautiful heather is not- found here, there 
are grasses and small-leaved plants, which impart a subdued 
richness like that which the heather preserves after its purple 
bloom is past. The streams, however, are more lovely than 
many of the Scottish rivulets, for they are clear, instead of 
running dark with the black stain of peat-moss. 

‘After my name had been marked on the fir-tree, we 
moved the camp a few miles, passing down into the neigh- 
bouring valley of the North River. Antoine and I rode 
forward together, but stopping for a while at the turn of the 
lull, we heard the rest of the party approaching, and waited 
for their arrival. As my. men came into view, dashing up at 
a brisk pace, or galloping here and there to drive in the 
straggling horses, I was greatly struck with their picturesque 
appearance ; having, indeed, hardly seen them on the march 
together since we left Edmonton, for the thick woods and 
narrow winding tracks keep a large party always in detach- 
ments. 

~—‘ All of them carried guns, all, except three, were dressed 
in fringed leather hunting-shirts,—of every colour, from the 
yellow of newness, and the white of new-washedness, to the 
blood-stained brown of extreme antiquity, as displayed in 
Antoine’s venerable garment. M‘Kay, powerful in form and 
strong of muscle, broad-chested, dark, and heavily bearded,’ 
with a wide-brimmed black hat and unfringed buff coat, and . 
bestriding a large brown horse, resembled some Spanish 
cavalier of old ; while Matheson, mounted’ on an active 
little dun pony,—with a blue Saskatchewan cap, gay with 
bright ribbons, over his long fair hair, and broad belts of scar- 
let cloth across his chest,—tall, straight, and merry,—was the 


Neuar xun ’ AND NORTID ‘RIVER CAMPS, 203 


image of a gallant young trotbadour, riding in smart undress 
to the tournament. 

‘M'‘Beath, lengthy of stature, dark, moustached and bearded, 
‘grave and calm, with a military belt and a rifleman’s sword, 
looked like an ex-Life Guardsman; half in uniform ; and this 

PI martial resemblance was heightened by the red blanket that 
‘served as his saddle-cloth, and contrasted richly with the coal- 
black horse that carried him. Kline, wiry and active, riding 
_ Lane—that fine old white mountain-horse, which few but he 
could capture when loose on the plains,—made a gay and 
cheerful show ; his broad-brimmed white hat, with its wavy 
blue-ribbon streamers, perched upon long curly black hair, and 
shading-a clever, well-bearded face ; lis chest surmounted by 
belts of silver and red brocade. : 6 

‘Next camé Munroe,—tall, strongly yet lightly framed, 
wearing a short canvas hunting-shirt belted round the waist 
with leather, and cross-belted with much-embroidered cloth 
of black; then Short, formed like a Greek statue, strong and 
very active, but of no great height, wearing a handsome pouch 
of leather ornamented with blue and white beads ;—hardy 
fellows both, of showy dashing air, ready to do aught that 
might become a man. 

‘Duncan, dressed in strong sandegrey shooting-suit and 
flannel shirt, wearing a stout wide-awake hat, and carrying 
a double gun in its plain waterproof cover, looked every inch 
the worthy Scotsman that he is. Near him rode Toma, the 
brave Iroquois canoc-man, leather-shirted, darkly and simply 
dressed, slow in the movement of his massive limbs, with 
swarthy face, and small black eyes, grave in their expression 
though often twinkling with humour,—a most faithful, and 
excellent fellow. , 

‘Then Lagrace, that original-and amusing old man, in a 


WN 


904 MEDICINE TENT RIVER. "CHAP, XIII. 


purple cotton shirt, tight but very long and wrinkled trousers, 
a white blanket skull-cap enriched with peak and ears, and 
decorated with streamers of scarlet cloth, beneath a battered 
eagle-feather which probably once adorned some Indian ~ 
horse’s tail,—that keen-witted ancient traveller who did 
everything differently from other men,—led when they 
drove, woke when they slept, drank cans of strong tea at 
dead of night, walked out alone and slew queer animals with 
sticks and stones while all the rest were at their meals,—that 
quaint old jester who enlivened our halts, after the weariest 
marches on the dullest days, by all manner of strange devices, 
—scalp-dances round the kettle lid, Cree war-songs, sudden 
wrestling matches with Antoine (in which this old aggressor 
always got the worst), jokes in the most astonishingly broken 
English,—-to whom or what shall he be likened, with his 
brown parchment skin, his keen aquiline nose, his piercing 
black eyes, long wild locks, and half-mockingly smiling, small 
and thin-lipped mouth? I know not—unless Mephistopheles 
have an American twin-brother! 
’ (To include the spectators—Antoine, stout and round of 
“make, of olive-brown skin and long black hair, was clad in 
the dusky leather shirt already’ spoken of, and bore on 
his arm his curious little rifle, and in his belt an immense 
hatchet-knife ; on his head was a dark-tinted Saskatchewan 
cap. Though long past his- youth, he still had the air of a 
hardy, active hunter, while his whole aspect truly bespoke 
him a most kind-hearted, honest, and agreeable man. 

‘ For myself,—I wore a—now only tolerably clean—cream- 
coloured hunting-shirt of buffalo skin, fringed on the arms 
and shoulders ; grey trousers fastened \under the knee with 
pieces of green braid; and a thin, white, wide-brimmed 
Yankee hat, with the high bell-shaped crown pressed in, and 


, « 
\ 
\ 


\ 


© 


CHAP. XILL AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS. 205 


a broad band of green ribbon tied round it ; from my shoulder 
was slung a telescope ; hanging to my leather belt was a short 
hunting knife, in a moose-skin sheath plainly embroidered 
with black and white beads, and beside it a small tobacco- 
pouch of the same pattern. My charger was the little black 
Hercules—Jasper, with immense crest and streaming mane 
. and tail. Across the saddle I carried my favourite rifle, in 
the fringed buff moose-skin cover which I got ' from the M‘Leod 
River Iroquois.) — 

‘As this gallant party topped the crest of a low hill fair 
in my view, ribbons streaming, guns swaying, whips flashing, 
gay colours sparkling in the sun, some approaching at.a 
quick trot, others dashing after vagrant steeds, or urging the 
heavy-laden pack-horses, who-jogged along like elephants 
with castles on their backs—all life, dash, rattle, and glitter, * 
~—they formed so bright a picture, so grandly back-grounded 
by the stately rocks, so gaily fore-grounded by the crisp 
green sward, that I could not refrain from attempting to 
describe it, though the ablest pen or pencil would fail to do 
justice to the scene.’ 

—We all halted together, and camped, and in the after- 
noon Antoine and I went out to the hills Coming to a rocky 

“ ravine, we observed a herd of female sheep on the opposite 
side, and opened fireon them. The old hunter killed one ewe 
and two lambs, I killed two of the ewes and wounded an- 
other, and afterwards getting a long running chance at the 
wounded one, I knocked it over also. 

After * arranging” the slain (to use Antoine’s expression) 
we proceeded to the highest part of a steep narrow ridge, a 
spur of thé principal range, and looking over the rocky wall 
that formed its upper edge, saw close by, just upon the other 
side, a small herd of rams, two of which had remarkably fine 


206 MEDICINE TENT RIVER CHAP, XIII. 


horns. The nearest of these I shot quite dead, the other 
struggled on severely wounded. Antoine ran after it to finish 
it off, bitt his flint-lock missed fire, and, before -he was ready 
again, the fine old ram dropped lifeless, and rolled down the 
slope of the hill. The horns of this pair were very good indeed, 
larger even than those brought in by Munroe the day before, 
but, as usual, somewhat worn and broken at the points. 

Returning to our horses, which we had left below, we got 
home in excellent time. On our arrival, Short reported that 
he had come close upon a large grisly bear, in the valley below. 
the ridge where I had been shooting the, rams. “It looked, 
at him, and heat it, but neither cared to begin the fight, so eagh * 
went his own way. [At the time, Short’s behaviour seemed ; 
to me rather over-cautious; with a good double-barreled 
gun in his hand, I thought he ought not to have declined the 
combat. But, on reflection, I believe he acted rightly, having 
no sufficient inducement for such a hazirdous venture. So 
lierce, strong, active, and tenacious of life is the grisly bear, 
that even for the best marksman, supported by trustworthy 
companions, it is the height of imprudence to risk a long 
shot at him, and a failure at close quarters leaves a solitary — 
hunter small chance indeed of escape. 

Talking about grislies, one day, with a good authority on 
the subject (I forget whom—it might have been James 
_ M‘Kay), he informed me that if that animal perceives a 
man in an open plain or glade he will generally advance 
towards him, and when about a hundred yards distant will 
rear himself up on his haunches to reconnoitre, after which 
he will either move away, or continue his advance. In the 
latter case, he stops again when about thirty yads from the 
hunter, and again rears himself on end. The hunter, mean- 
while, steadily waits, reserving his fire, and the grisly, having 


CHAP, XU AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS. 207 


finished his inspection, again advances, until he is ten yards 
from his opponent, when for the third time he rises in all his 
gigantic height, prepared to hurl himself forth in the last 
terrible spring. Now is the hunter's moment: quick as 
thought his bullet passes into the chest of the bear, sped at 
that short range with such precision that it carries with it 
instantaneous death—woe to the hunter if it does not! 

In the Rocky Mountains, though probably not north of. 
the Bow River and its head-waters, there exists a savage and 
treacherous wild beast, more dangerous in some respects than 
even the grisly himself. This is the puma—or some feline 
animal closely resembling it. in colour and general appearance 
—which, while nearly as’fierce and tenacious of life as the 
grisly bear, greatly excels him in activity, besides possessing 
an advantage denied to him—the-cat-like power of climbing 
the highest trees. a 

But it is not owing to these formidable qualities that the 
puma is an object of some dread, it is on account of its stealthy 
habits of nocturnal aggression. Marking out a small party 
of hunters or travellers, it will follow them séeretly for days, 
and watch by their camp at night, till at last it discovers 
one of their number resting a little separate from his com- 
panions. ‘Then, when all‘is dark and silent, the insidious * 
puma glides in, and the sleeper knows but a short awakening. 
when its fangs are buried in his throat. 

One consolation is left to the survivors—if they kill the 
eater they may eat him in return ; for the puma is considered 
the most delicately-flavoured animal in the Territories. 

These details I gathered from my men, and I see no reason 
to doubt their truth, for; though such ferocious practices are 
not, to my knowledge, attributed to the puma of the Atlantic 
States, the jaguar of South America—a beast of kindred 


208 | MEDICINE TENT RIVER CHAY. XI1L 


species —is written of as attacking sleepers in the very 
manner described. One of my party amused us exceedingly 
by a story concerning a certain expedition to which he had been 
lately attached :—how some of the people belonging to it had 
noticed a puma in a tree, and immediately saluted it with a 
volley ; but how, instead of securing the victim, they had 
simultaneously teken to their heels at the moment of drawing 
trigger, and run so fast and far that they never felt inclined 
to go back to claim their trophy,—which they most shrewdly 
suspected might have claimed them, for, while the death of 
the enemy was doubtful, its indignation, if alive, was not. 

' Neither in the mountains nor elsewhere did I even catcha 
slinpse of a puma, or observe its tracks, or any other sign of 


- its existence. At one of -the forts, however, I was shown 


some Blackfoot article—a quiver, or a saddlecloth, 1 think— 
which was chiefly composed of the fawn-coloured skin of that 
animal.] 

‘ Fine weather still,—but misty dver the distant mountains.’ 

September Tth.—‘ Slept a little better. It is all very well 
to talk of custom reconciling to anything, of “ hardy hunters,” 
and the “enervating influences of civilisation,” but, for my 
part, I find that no custom enables me to sleep as well on the 
ground as on a good mattress) The more tired I‘ am the 
worse it is; I Le awake for hours, every joint aching, half. 
my body too hot, the other half too cold. Then as to food ; 
alcohol may be “poison,” but I am ‘certain that tea has not 
equal virtue for restoring a thoroughly tired man,—to draw 
no parallel between the respective pleasantnesses in taste of 
a black, bitter fluid, on the one hand, and such delicious 
drinks as pale ale, sherry, clafet, or champagne, on the other. 
As part proof, I find myself not only very thin, but in bad 
condition, weak, hardly able to climb the mountains ; yet for 


ee 


CHAP, XII, AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS. - 209 


some time there have been no great fatigues to try my 
constitution, while the open air, and absence of care and 
business, ought in themselves to have doubled my strength. 
But, after all, what is strength or weakness if one succeeds 
in doing what one wishes to do? <A great deal as to the 
pleasure at the time; nothing as to the regult’ [These 
remarks seem inconsistent with others in the joutnal, where 
tea is glorified, and the healthiness of tent life xtolled,— 
nevertheless I leave them. Under varying_crrcumstances 
the thoughts and feelings vary, and it is no true record of 
travel that displays nothing of the chameleon element in the 
traveller. Looking back after these many years, I should--— 
say, that tea was one of the best of drinks under conditions of 
ordinary health and labour, but that stimulants are useful in 
cases of illness or over-fatigue. Also, J think that the 
system sooner recovers from fatigue or ‘small illnesses amidst 
civilised comforts than in the rough life of the woods and plains, 
though the latter is in itself far pleasanter and healthier. . 
My mind had forgotten the toils of the journey through 
the thick woods, but my body liad not, and the mountain 


hunting was telling on me more severely than I imagined.] 
‘Set off in good time this morning to look for Short’s bear, 
to get more rams with fine heads, and to carry in yesterday’s 
game. Half the people remained in camp, cutting up and 
drying meat for-dur consumption on the homeward journey. 
The bear was not to be found, though we saw where he 
had been digging for roots, so I quitted the valley, and 
ascended the mountains with M‘Kay and Antoine: Passing 
over the ridge we had clinlbed the day before, we went 
as far as the top of the next, and there came suddenly 
upon a small herd of old rams, having got very close with- 
out exciting their suspicions. One of them fell to my first 
shot, but I missed with the second barrel. As they ran 
P 


Fe 


240 MEDICINE TENT RIVER CHAP, XIU. 


down the declivity of the hill Antoine made a long and fine 
shot, and killed a ram with very handsome large horns, more 
twisted than usual, and entirely perfect in their points. My 
sheep was an older one, with horns a good deal worn ; he was 
exceedingly fat, looking when skinned lke a well-fed English 
wether of the highest quality. 

‘These beautiful mountain sheep are about the size of a 
large fallow buck, but Hghter in the haunch, deeper in the 
chest, longer in the leg, and altogether larger in the bone. 
Except in the shape of the horns, their head is like that of 
the common goat; the eye large, round and full, with a very 
largaa pupil, leaving only a narrow rim of pale yellow iris. 
The hair is coarse and of a brown grey, except on the haunch 
and the inside of the: legs. and stomach,- which are white. 
Some are much darker: than others, apparently irrespective 
of age, though those under two or three years old are invari- 
ably light-coloured. 

‘The females are smaller, than the males, and have little 
goat-like horns, instead of the great curled horns of the rams, 
which on the American side of the border have given to the 
whole race the name of “the Big-horn.” At this season the 

_rams are in their best condition, very fat and but slightly 
rank ; in October they begin to become uneatable, as is the 
case with the red-deer stag in Scotland’* 

An admiring contemplation of the beautiful horns carried 
by Antoine’s sheep made me anxious to get some other speci- 
inens to match them; so, while the “arranging” proceeded, | 
I set off by myself, and took a pretty long climb after a small 
band that had just then appeared at no great distance from 
us’ Whisky, who insisted on following me, came very much 

* Ovis Montana. Rocky Mountain Sheep. Argali—Cook, Godman. Ovis 
Ammon Pygergus — Griffith, Big-horn — Lewis and Clarke. Cul-blane, et 


Grosse-corne — Canadian Voyageurs. Afy-atlehk — Cree Indians. Ema-Kee- 
kawnow Blackfeet, ete. Ricnarpson,— Faun, Bor.-~Am., , vol, iL P. 271. 


* OMAP. XII. AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS, 211 


in the way, either running forward, or lagging behind and 
squeaking loudly if I made any threatening movement ; 
notwithstanding this difficulty I got tolerably near them, but 
missed the two running chances they offered. By making a 
stalk, however, I got right above the sheep, who had betaken 
themselves to a very deep grassy hollow among the cliffs, 
and knocked one over at upwards of 180 yards, firing at four 

‘that stood close together. His head, though respectable, was 
not particularly large or good, 

‘Opening my telescope rather quickly to look at the slain, 

before descending to where. he lay, Whisky uttered a squeak: 
that might have been heard a’ mile off, and took to his heels, 
evidently thinking I had got some whip of a new and danger- 
ous pattern. I never struck the poor creature nor spoke 
harshly to him in-my life, but these Indian dogs are so 
fearfully-besiten : and ill-treated at home that they almost 
—breathe in yells and squeaks. { have often seen children, 
four or five years old, take up the largest stick or stone they 
could lift, and dash it down on the wretched body of some 
unoffending dog—though it must be confessed, that at the 
forts or large camps the dogs are such a nuisance, so trouble- 
some, dirty, and noisy, that no one can resist hurling an 
occasional stone at them.’ 

Having rejoined my companions, we set out together to 
stalk a great herd of rams which had just come into view: 
they were scattered about, feeding, or lying in groups, on 
the steep declivity of a hill at the end of the ridge we 
saw them from. We quickly gained the top of the hill, 
scrambled through some difficult rocks without alarming or 
disturbing the sheep, and got within range. 

Seeing a good chance, J fired a couple of shots at a pair 
of splendid rams that were feeding about not far beneath us. 
One fell dying, the other walked away, blood dripping from 


. 


219 |. MEDICINE TENT RIVER CHAY. Sut. 


his nose. M‘Kay fired immediately afterwards, and killed a 
very fing ram; then we rushed different ways among the 
rocks, in chase of the rest of the herd. . 

I began by firing two ineffectual shots at some rams 
” moving along the face of the precipice far below ; then 
observinggthe sheep I had wounded at my second shot, I 
fired at him again, but without perceptible result, As he 
was much too far off, I attempted to go down to him, and 
suddenly found myself in a very dangerous place, where a 
wide and steeply-descending trench-like hollow, between two 
firm hard ridges, was filled up and hidden by an accumula- 
tion of pebbles and small fragments of rock. Wherever I 
stepped, the stones and shingle gave way in masses, carrying 
me along with them as they went sliding on their downward 
course, hurrying towards depths I tried not to think about ; 
and, to add to my trouble, Whisky appeared just above 
me—whining with fright, and struggling desperately to 
keep his footing ,on the treacherous surface,—and sent the 
stones in showers past my head. I hardly expected ever to 
get to the top,—to descend or stand still would have been 
death—but with great care and exertion, using my rifle as a 
support by laying it flat on any firmer ledges, and leaning on 
it as I dragged myself upwards, I at- length reached solid 
ground,— feeling very grateful to a kind Providence for 
bringing me safely through. . 

Neither M‘Kay nor Antoine were in sight, though I heard 
some shots quite distinctly, so I returned to where the rams 
we had first killed were lying. No one appearing, I deter- 
_ mined to walk homewards, and make another effort, by the’ 
way, to.get the wounded ram I had already so nearly broken 
my neck in following. I took-care, however, to choose a 
different road, and, after some climbing, at eneth found 
myself close to the object of my scarch. He yas standing by 


ier 


conar, xan, AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS, 9 -777"'913 
the edge of @ cliff about thirty feet high, I was exactly 


beneath him, on a narrow and sloping grass-covered shelf of © 


‘ rock, which overhung a tremendous precipice that dropped 


sheer to the very base of the mountain itself. 

I stepped back as far.as I could, and fired at his heart ; 
it was a miss apparently; for he only moved higher up ; 
then he turned and came to his former position, and 
looked at me over the verge of the height. I instantly 
gave him the second barrel: the ball struck home; he made 
one spring off the cliff into empty air,.and came crashing 
down on the turf at my feet,—nearly falling on poor Whisky, 
who must have entered this day in his-journal as one of 
horrors. The ram lay kicking in the agonies*of death, and 
was on the very point of rolling off the platform, but T got 
“shold of his hind leg, and held on till he expired, and then 
epropped his body firmly up with stones. 

At that moment ‘I heard Antoine calling close by; he 
presently descended, and joined me on the narrow platform. 
His news was soon told :—M‘Kay had shot several more of 
the rams; he himself had been unsuccessfully following a 
wounded one ever since we separated. 

It was beginning to get dark, so we hastened to re-ascend 
the precipices, then we went back to the safer ground, where 
some of the first killed sheep were lying just as they had 
fallen. As it was so late, Antoine only gralloched and partly 
‘skinned them,—placing something near each of them to drive 
away the crows,—instead-of “atranging” them in the usual 
manner. 

‘When time permits, the hunter’s full “ arrangement” is 
as follows :—-He begins by skinning the sheep, then takes off 
the head, and removes the paunch and offal as far as the heart; 
next he cuts off the legs and shoulders and back. The chest, 
with the neck attached, now remaius (a strange-looking 

* 


aN 


— 


214 MEDICINE TENT RIVER CHAP. XIN. 


object, which would scare a respectable larder into fits), and 
this he proceeds to lay beside the other joints, plading there 
also such internal,parts as are considered good. Over the 
whole he then draws the skm, and having planted a stick in _ 
the ground close by; with a ‘Hadkerchief or some such thing 
fastened to it, the operation of arranging is complete, and the 


“animal is ready for conveyance home. when the horses arrive, 


‘ Antoine goes through the whole process with a large and 
very heavy knife, like a narrow and pointed’ cleaver, which i is 


also used for cutting wood and performing all the offices of a , - 


hatchet, but tnwieldy as it is, a practised hand can_skin the ° 
smallest and most delicate creatures with-it,as Seksily” “Asywith 
a pocket-knife’ {I have seen Antoine skint @ grotnd- squirrel. 
with this ponderous weapon yet: it ‘got ) no > sharpening, ‘except, fh 
an occasional rub on somessmooth stone. -picked * up ‘almost at- 
random from the bed of the nearest river] ; 

On reaching the top of the ridge we met M‘ ‘Kay, then all 
serambled down in the dark, and, what we hardly-expected, 
‘found the horses just where we had left them in the morning. 


_ M'Gillis had been tied, as we had less confidence in, his 


steadiness, but though Jasper and theold mare were free and un 


‘. hobbled, they had not wandered a hundred yards from the place.” 4% 


“We had a tedious and rather difficult ride home, ‘Whuni- 


-nated by flashes of lightning in every direction, though but 


feebly enlightened by the moon, "new risen above fhe mountain 
ridges. At length the camp fire shone cheerily before us, and 
we got in just in time to finish supper before a tremendous 
storm of wind and rain came sweeping down the valley fréin 
the, north,’ 

"September Bth— A slight sprinkling of snow on the_ 
ground. Some of the men went with horses and brought in 
the shegp killed yesterday, while.others continued drying our 
store of meat over a slow fire. . ‘ 


4 


“ 


HEAD OF A ROCKY MOUNTAIN RAM. (See p. 215 } 


4 


"¢ 


> ‘F 


ee 


+ 


SARBS3. ee M8 


INSTITUTE 


> 


CHAP. XU. 


‘There were now eight very fine heads in camp, from - 


“AND NORTH RIVER UAMPS. =. 215 


* 


" which I seleoted the following to take home :—1. That of the 
ram that leaped off the rock. This was far the finest. I 


marked it 7, on the left horn,—for the day of the month on 


which I got it. 2. One shot by May from the top’of the 


hill, when we came on the great herd, marked M'K. vin. 3. 


One shot by myself at the same place, marked vu. 4. The 


fine one Antoine killed at a long running shot, marked 
A. vi. 5. One of those I shot on the 6th, marked v1. 6. The 
one brought into camp by Munroe on the 5th, marked M. v. 
These are all remarkably good heads. 

[The dimensions of the héads in inches are as follows :— 


Length following Circumference at root Distance from point 
curve, of horn. to point. 
. No, 1. 38} 1b, . 21h 
FT 
3. 32) 14 . 16 
4, 344 , 14 19} 
5. 32h 144 i6 
6,33 ~ (4 — 


The length of No. 1, it will be observed, is uot less than 
38h inches, the circumference at the base 15 inches. This is 
an immensely large head. Captain Palliser speaks as follows 
of the horns of the Mountain Ram :—“ I have measured some 
that curved more than «usual, as much as 32 inches in length, 
the hollow part is capable of containing two quarts of water, 
and is 23 [?13] inches in circumference at the orifice.” 
(Solitary Rambles of « Hunter in the Prairies, 1853, p. 219.) 
Sir John Richardson, in his description of the animal, states 
the length of the horn of a specimen in the British Museum 
to be 34 inches, circumference at base 13 inches, distance 

~ from tip of one horn-to-tipof other, 27[? 17] inches. (Haun. 
Bor- Ane vol. ip. 274.) AR Kane, however, mentions a head 
seen ly lim wher at Jasper’a louse in 1847, exceeding that 


Pane ane) ~ 
. v2. wee 


216 MEDICINE TENT RIVER “CHAP. XI 


of my ram—I made a sketch of a ram’s head of an enormous 
size; his horns . . . measured 42 inches in length.” 
(Wanderings of an ‘Artist ainong the Indians, 1859, p. 845.) 
This must have been a very exceptional animal, mine being 
so greatly the best head out of six chosen from those of more 
than a dozen old rains, shot in a district long free from dis- 
turbance, where the finest sheep were likely to be congregated.] 

All these heads reached Scotland safely, except No. 6, of 
which I have only a single horn, the rest of it having been 
torn from the pack-saddle during our marches through the 
rough fir-woods. I also brought home a number of the best 
skins, which had been carefully marked at the same time 
with the heads. 

{I did not look back on the previous day’s shooting with 
unmingled pleasure. There was too much slaughter, and 
conscience rather reproached me, prompting various reflec- 
tions, which found place at some length in my journal ; the 
page, however, is altogether obliterated, except these few ex- 
pressions at the end:—‘Yesterday’s shooting was sucegssful 
enough, especially as regards my chief object-fine ads ; 
and a man who travels thousands of miles for such’ trophies 
may be excused for taking part in one day’s rather reckless 
slaughter. After all, there were not more than twelve killed, 
and a few wounded, out of a very large herd, which perhaps 
may never again be alarmed by the sight of man.” . I might 
have added, that all the. meat was required for use, so that 
nothing was wasted but.two or three of the more distant 
carcases. 


Still there is something repugnant to the feelings in carry- 
ing death and anguish on so large a scale amongst beautiful 
inoffensive, animals. One thinks little—too little—of the 
killing of sinall game, but in shooting large game the butchery | 
of the act comes more home, one sees with such vividness the 


CHAP. XUIL. AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS, 217 


wounds, and the fear, and the suffering. But it does not do 
to look at things too narrowly,—one grows morbid,—and no 
thinking will ever bring one to the root of the matter. 

- Nevertheless, I would that those foolish boys who pride 
themselves on making long shots, and pour their pellets so 
freely, in these days of rapid loading, into the bodies of birds 
and beasts out of all reaSonable range—I would that they 

_ might be persuaded to serious reflection, in regard to the pain 
and lingering misery they so néedlessly inflict on God’s 
harmless creatures.] 

The mist, which had been gathering all day, broke into ' 
a Teguiar snow-storm as the evening came on, but not before 
the men had packed a great deal of dried meat, besides. 
shoeing several of the horses. In ground of this rocky 
nature the fore-feet of the horses require to be shod, to 


~--—~preserve thenr from breaking ;~in the plains, it is their hind-" 


feet that need’ shoes, because the hoofs, worn and polished 
by the crisp grasses,.slip about as if on ice, unless furnished 
with some iron hold-fast. 

September 9th—‘ The snow-storm has lasted all night, and 
all day, though now towards evening it is lessening. The 
mountains are blotted out in mist, the hills are white, except 
where dark rocks project through the surface, and the ground 
is covered many irfches deep with snow. 

‘The men seem happy in their large tent, singing jolly 
songs ; and I am not uncomfortable in mine, warmly clothed, 
a great fire of pinelogs blazing before me, and Shakespeare 
dividing the time with great meals of mountain mutton, fol- 
lowed hy pipes of that excellent tobacco which the Company 
so benignantly supplies. 

‘And yet—“surgit amari aliquid” _though the hody 
may be at ease, the mind will feel restless and bereave its 


quieter companion of comfort. 


218 MEDICINE TENT RIVER CHAP. XU, 


‘To be storm-staid for an indefinitely long time in the .~ 
heart of the Rocky Mountains, with winter stealing on apace, 
and a long and difficult journey before one, is not an en- 
couraging prospect. Nor, disguise it as one may, is “it very 
enlivening to sit, with wet feet, under a thin canvas covering 
that does not quite exclude the keen north wind. Then the 
day is endurable, but those weary nights—nov, alas, those 
long nights—that is the time of woe. 

‘ Nevertheless, it is better to be cold and aching under a 
tent in the wilderness, than to be feverish and nervous in a 
warm house at home. Allis for the best. Nothing is ruin- — 
ously bad for a man but that enervate wallowing in luxury 
and feeble indolence; which in this world does more evil to 
his own being than high-handed resolute sin ; and may likewise 
do so in the next world, for aught we know,—for where 
there is strength there is always hope of its. being turned 
to good account, while from nothingness nothing..can ; be 
made. 

‘ Finished “ Titus Andronicus,” a most disagreeable play, 
only redeemed by a few fine passages, such as,—‘“ Sweet mercy 
is nobility’s true badge ;” Titus’s short speech,— The hunt 
is up,” and Tamora’s melodious invitation to Aaron. The 
, play bears traces of ‘touch mind-cudgeling: the poet must 
have been very young when he wrote it.* How inferior the 
commonplace fiend Aaron, to that splendid villain Iago! 
» One a mere vulgar monster, the other just such a plausible 
demon as any very subtle-minded man might tremble to 
think he himself might become, if bereft of God’s aid and 
exposed to strong temptation. 

‘It is remarkable that Shakespeare often puts very noble 
sentiments into the mouths of the most evil characters,—as 
Tamora in the lines—“Sweet mercy ;” and Iago, constantly, 


- 


* Most of this play is certainly not by Shakespeare. ~ 


we 


CHAP. XUIT AND NORTH RIVER CAMBS. 219 


—perhaps to bring them closer to the standard of ordinary 
humanity, and to show that they had once known the right 
though now they did the wrong,.that they had passed into 
guilt through paths of self-deception and conscience-harden- 
ing, not rushed imevitably into it through the resistless force 
of destiny or the sudden coercion of some higher, power’ 7 

September 10th—The morning broke cleat and fine, and 
the powerful sun soon melted the snow in the lower regions. 
Taking M‘Kay and Antoine, I rode down the valley in search 


‘of the. grisly bear; but could see nothing of him, though 


we went a long way exploring the woods and back-lying 
glens. As the case was evidently hopeless, I left my 
men, who seemed anxious to explore the track we were likely 
to follow on, moving camp next day, and set out alone for the 


‘ top of one of the ridges that led up to the highest part of 


the grand range itself, thinking I might thus gain the suramit 
of some peak, and discover what lay heyond the valley that 
had hitherto bounded our view. 

I had a long and hard climb to begin with, and then a 
succession of difficult climbs over the numerous rocky walls 
that obstructed me as I slowly made my way along the ridge. 
There was still a good deal of snow on the high ground, 
although gradually melting, and this proved helpful in many 


- places, as it was firm enough to give a foothold where the - 


stones were loose and unsteady: At length I got close to the _ 
foot of the great principal cliff at the top of the mountain ; but ~ 
there found myself stopped by a small but excessively steép 
and difficult rock, which stood right in the path, where the 
sharply-cut ridge was at its narrowest, flanked also on either 
side by a tremendous precipice coated with layers of sheet ice. 
Twice I tried this rocky barricade, but it was quite impassable, 
unless by seramibling round it, where, though less steep, it partly 
overhung the precipice ; but even there it was very difficult, and 


/ 


‘ ' 
, ‘ 


220 7 MEDICINE TENT RIVER CHAP. XIIL. 


g 


e vaited’ me, forther 0 on; sol reluctantly ‘yielded to necessity, 
and turned away—-owning myself vanquished, for, except a 
single peak, t had seen nothing on the farther side of the 
valley’s barrier. 3.3 

When a long way on the downward course,—which, con- 
trary to one’s usual experience among rocks, was easier than 
the ascent, ——I discovered that I had left my rifle behind, having 
laid it at the foot of a steep little crag, where both hands 
were required, and this having happened near the top, it cost 
me half my work again to repair the unlucky forgetfulness. 

‘Owing to this delay, night overtook me before I had 
even reached the pine-woods in the valley that lay between 
me and the camp, and in consequence J had one of the most 
disagreeable walks imaginable. The distance must have been 


four or five miles, and mostly uphill;. there were rocks to 


~ descend and streams to cross ; the woods were much obstructed 
with fallen timber and deep rough water-courses, and the 
opener spaces were filled with thick brush, There was no 
path, and though the moon had risen, the spruces cast such a 
shade as to cause almost total darkness; added to this I 
was very tired, for the day had been hot and my toils severe ; 
.besides, at every moment I expected to stumble upon the 
grisly bear, whose very ddmain I was traversing, and against 
whom I should have had no chance, as the light was not 
sufficient for shooting,  ~ we 

‘Several times I fired off my rifle, in reply to shots from 
the camp intended for my guidance, but the echoes made 
these exchanges of signals useless, and it was not till within 
a mile of home that M‘Kay and Munroe met me with horses, 
having at last discovered my direction. Most heartily glad 
was I to find myself on the back of a horse—no easy-chair is 
so youd a rest for aman tired out with walking—and this 


i 


e 


CHAD. XE AND NORTH RIVER CAMPS. 92] 


short ride, and an excellent supper, with plenty of tea, com- 
pletely refreshed me and put all to richts.. 

* ‘T have gained little by my hard climb, except making 
out perfectly the run of the valleys in which we are. There 
are two main valleys,—that which we left on the 6th, and that 
in which is our present camp ; the former running N.W., the 
other 8.E. ; the Medicine Tent River, an Athabasca head-water, 
running down the first, the North River, a Saskatchewan 
head-water, going down the second; the hill on which we 
placed the monument standing exactly at the central point 
where the two descents divide. . 

_ ‘All the mountains appear to be most precipitous on their 
eastern and northern sides, the greater number looking as if 
strong west winds had bent their peaks, giving them a set like 


_ trees exposed to the force of a prevalent gale. _ 


‘The rocks over which I climbed to-day, when going along 
‘the ridge, were nearly all different in material, some being 
brokén in sharp edges, others ragged like coarse white 
coral, others formed of thin layers of a black, slaty-looking 
stone, which crumbled in the hand. I came upon a large 
Aract of this last kind in descending one of the slopes, and 
found, mixed up with the broken shingle, heavy round stones, 


varying in size from a 28 lb shot. to a billiard ball; some of 


€ 


them whole and lying half buried, but most of them broken, . 


and showing themselves to be composed of thin layers of 
black stone, enclosing a yellowish substance— orange towards 
the centre—like some sort of ore. I also found many broken 
Encrinites. ; ~ , 

*The country through which the North River passes after 
leaving this height-of-land valley, appears to be another val- 
ley, so large and wide that it would be called a plain were it 
not entirely covered with dense pine-wood,’ 


i] 


CHAPTER AIV. 
NORTH RIVER CAMP TO KOOTANIE PLAIN. 


Ss UNDAY, September 11th.—‘ This being a very fine warm 


day we moved our camp, and, after making a short march, » 


halted on ‘the North River, opposite to a magnificent rock, 
resembling the bastion of some giant’s castle. Two slopes 
proceeding from the debris at its foot were covered with 
small pines, those on the one flourishing and erect, those on 
the other mostly. beaten down and broken: the whole scene 
sugaested an assault on a fortress, up a practicable breach,— 
troops advancing steadily and in good order to the attack, 
and troops hurled backwards in ruin and confusion.’ * 

As we passed the foot of a glen, down which a little 
stream pursued its way, we observed an immense flight of 
“Painted Lady” butterflies ;+ they were hovering about in 
hundreds, or settling on the young firs that grew on the sandy 
ground in a sheltered sunny spot, their gay wings making 
a pretty contrast with the dark green colour of the trees. 
We noticed the tracks of a bear near the same place. Not 


* To this grand rocky mass I have given the name of Mound Dalhousie, . 


in memory of a much lamented friend—the 11th Earl of that title (more ex- 
tensively known as Lord Panmure),—at whose house my journey to America 
was first suggested. 

+ Having but little knowledge of ‘entomology, I cannot be certain if these 
butterflies were the “ Cynthia Cardui,” or another variety of somewhat similar 
appearance. I am inclined to think they were the “ Cynthia Huntera "— 
Belle Dame dev Amérique. Ricuanpson,—Faun. Bor. -4m., VOL. iil. pp. xi, 
and 295. Morris,—British Butterflies, p. 76, third edition. 


t 


cnar. xiv. NORTH RIVER CAMP TO KOOTANIE PLAIN. 22 


far'off there was a larger brook, also running into the.rive\. 
ich had the peculiarity of tinting all the stones in its bed 


giih a deep crimson stain. I picked up two of them as 
specimens ; they have much lost colour in course of years. 

September 12th.—Before we started I began a sketch of the 

grand rock opposite our camp, but the heat of the sun was so 
intolerable that’L had to content myself with little more than 
a mere outline. We continued our march down the North 
River. The rocks were very fine; all of the same massive 
square-cut character. At dinner-time we halted near a small 
shallow lake. A large bird of the crow species rising suddenly 
off the shore, I tried my rifle at it, and knocked some feathers 
from its wing as it flew away.. These birds, which were 
numerous in the district, had a very ‘tuneful note,—not 
_ unlike distant melodious piping on a reed.* - 

We now left the branch of the river we had been hitherto 
following, and took our course up one of its two more southern 
branches, choosing that which lay most to the middle, and 
after a long hard struggle through a stretch of burnt and fallen 
timber of the worst description, we camped on a sandy flat 
close beside the stream. ; 

The scenery had become exceedingly grand and beautiful. 

' The valley was a mile in width; to the east and west sheer 
precipices, 3000 feet high, confined it on either hand with a 
majestic barrier‘ That on the eastern side is of a most re- 
markable shape, resembling an immense square block of 
masonry, placed on the summit of a vast mound with gradual 
slopes, like an altar raised by giants of old to some of the 
extinct gods. 


* This variety does not seem to be mentioned in Sir John Richardson’s 
work, as the only similar bird described there,—Corvus Corone—The Crow, 
—Haw-haw-sew, of the Cree Indians,—is not stated to be a piping crow.— 
Fun, Bor.Am., vol. ii, p. 291. , 


994 NORTH RIVER CAMP CHAP. XIT. 


‘It was very fine to behold the moon rising from behind 
this enormous mass, which remained in absolute blackness, 
while all things else were touched with silver light. Just — 
before she emerged, a large, soft-looking meteor fell from the 
sky directly above us, and slowly floated away towards the 
south. 4 

_ ‘The moon was full, aml encircled by a ring of orange and 
yellow ; she floated in SE midst of innumerable small fleecy 
clouds, which wandered across a sky of the intensest blue. This 
cloud-formed prevalence of mottled grey covered the southern 
heaven, and ettded in an arch, exact as the rainbow, passing 
through Corona Borealis and just enclosing’ Cygnus and 
Pegasus. Beyond this line, to the north, the clouds were 
dark, and only perceptible from_the absence_of. the-stars. they - 
obscured. As night advanced the region of white cloud grew 
“less, and horizontal streaks of light, like the Aurora, appeared 
beneath the polar star.’ 

September 13th.—We crossed the river and for 4 short time 
ascended its course, then marched back the way we came, as 
Antoine fancied we-should not be able to find an outlet at the 
end of the valley. When we had gone a long way down 
streain, it appeared that he was quite ignorant of this part of 
the country, and had no better reason for doubting our former 
track, than the discovery of certain marks on the trees, which 
seemed to denote that Indians had recently preceded us, and 
then turned back. Wy 

[There was a sudden halt ; Antoine, Munroe, and M‘Kay 
began to hold a council, and showed signs of doubt as to the 
proper road. It displeased me to find that our long counter- 
march was likely to prove fruitless, especially as everything 
that day had been done without reference to my opinion. 
Rightly or wrongly, I suspected an intention to leave the 


CHAP. XIV. TO KOOTANIE PLAIN, . 225 


motintains by the easiest and plainest road, instead of explor- 
ing the finer and less-traversed routes, according to my 
frequently expressed desire. Perhaps théfe‘was no such deli- 
berate intention, but various circumstances had lately indi- 
cated that influences opposed to my own were at work, 
patticalarly..the “ constant discussions goin® on in Cree, of 
which, from knowing a few words here and there, I often 
guessed the purport. | 

‘I was very angry—things having been done without 
consulting me—so instantly turned my horse, and rode back 
alone through the woods, till I came to the place where we 
had crossed the river. As there was no proper track, I had © 
some difficulty in finding the way, but got-to my point all 
right, and after a while the rest came up. ~ 

[About this time I discovered, in conversation with 


M‘Kay, that’ Munroe felt aggrieved, thinking that-I had 


slighted him in the office of guide—which he then considered 
himself to be filling, though I had not so supposed it,—by 
once or twice refusing to camp at places designated by him 
for that purpose. « > 

I pointed out to M‘Kay, that though in ordinary cases the 
guide was the proper person to settle camp arrangements, 
my sport and pleasure were the objects of the present 
journey, and that while fully believing in Munroe’s com- 
petency to choose the best camping-places, I sometimes pre- . 
ferred inferior sites, on account of the beauty of the scenery. 
May, who had been inclined to sympathise with his fellow- 
guide, at once understood mé, and doubtless satisfied Munroe, 
for cordiality seemed quite restored.] , oo 

‘After dinner we continued our march, and a weary one 
it was. The river was so flooded that we were obliged to 
keep a high line, over a succession of steep ridges with deep 

Q 


226 NORTH RIVER CAMP CHAP, XIV. 


hollows between, the whole of which were covered with burnt 
and fallen pines lying about in the most obstructive manner. 
Nothing can exceed the discomfort of passing over stich a, 
counts, especially when the ground is soft and miry. _ # 
«The larger: lyiny:pines tear and wound the horses; ‘and 
keep them perpetually jumping, for the obstacles are too great 
to be stepped over; the smaller ones meet you like chevaux- 
de-Trjses placed at every angle, some pointing towards your 
face, others at your legs or your horse's stomach ; and, being 
dry, hard, and sharp, they pierce like spears when met directly, 
or tear. your-knees and hands if you merely rub against 

_ them. ’ 

S ‘Nothing but leather is a defence. I often felt as af in 
one of the tournaments of old, as these lances of the forest 
splintered against my buff jerkin. and nearly drove me out 
of the saddle, or, artistically aimed at the head, lifted my 
“beaver” off, sometimes well-nigh treating me to Absalom’s 
fate,’ ; 1 : 

> Yesterday “Mission Cendré,” the large roan horse I bought 
from the missionaries at St. Ann, one of my best, got'a severe 
stab under the thigh, and was hardly able to go on, and to-day 
one of the Edmonton horses came to his end in a very singular 
manner. At dinner time we observed him to be looking dull 
and not feeding, but there seemed so little the matter that 
when we started Lagrace rode him as usual. He went fairly 

,enough till beginning to climb a steep hill, when he showed 
signs of sluggishness, as we thought it, and his rider urged 
him on;. suddenly he stopped, sank down, and lay to all 
appearance lifeless. In a little while he raised his head 
and gazed around with a perplexed and anxious air, then 
uttered three piercing neighs, the strangest I ever heard, 
turned heavily on his side, and died. M‘Kay attempted 


CHAP. XIV. TO KOOTANIE PLAIN. 927 


to bleed him, but no blood would flow, and the death-glaze 
came over his eyehkalls. On opening him we found his 
lungs diseased and his kidneys inflamed; his blood was 
very thin, except about the heart, where it was thick and 
clotted. The other horses seemed scared; many of them 
would not pass near the dead body., 

‘After another hour’s struggling we halted, ‘and camped 

_on an island of the North River, not having made more than 
three miles’ progress on this unlucky day. 

‘Lightning was flashing in the heavens at nightfall, and 
dense clouds floated over all the sky ; we prepared for a 
storm, but there only came a slight showet’ 

September 14th—Our start was delayed by a long search 
for two of the horses, which, being at last found, we pursued 
our way 8.S.W. up-the North River, and rode forward at a 
pretty good’ nave, Bong ‘hsome parts of the track were full 
of obstructions. ‘Late in the evening, while preparing to 
camp, we saw some white goats high up among the cliffs. 
-(They are true goats, though ‘often spoken of as sheep, and 
seem to frequent steeper precipices than the grey sheep.) 

‘Late as it was, Antoine and I went after them, and climbed 
some places I should not have liked to venture on alone, 
though a tolerably practised climber in my own country. 
Night came on as we reached the top of the ridge ; the 
goats had moved out of sight ; and nothing was left but to 
make our way down to the valley,—and hard work it was. . 
There was just light enough to see a few yards in front, but 
not sufficient to discover where the descent was, safe, except 
by actual experiment. We crept carefully along the face of 
the cliff, sometimes staggering in loose shingle, sometimes 
finding our footing as best we could in the steeper places. 

‘Several times we fancied we had hit ona a good way to get 


~ 


928 . NORTH RIVER CAMP OMAP, XIV. 


down, but it always ended in what Antoine called “ un rocher 
coupé ”—otherwise, a precipice. Even he began to think we 
should have to pass the night there (like flies on a wall) —I 
had for long been expecting nothing better—but Providence 
directed us at last to a gentler slope, by which we.descended 
in safety to the valley level, reaching camp barely in time “40 
shelter from a heavy fall of rain. Melancholy and depressed, 
—from fatigue I suppose, and from having been so long in 
fear for my life while among the cliffs in the darkness,’ 

September 15th.— Bitterly cold night, rain till near dawn ; 
then hard frost, tents and oil-cloths sheeted with ice. The sun 
takes very long to rise in these deep valleys, being obstructed 
by the mountains, which stand like walls on either side. 
Till he shows himself there is a vault-like chill in ‘the air, but 
as soon ‘as his rays surmount the barrier the heat becomes 
oppressive. 

“We continued our march up the valley, along a beautiful 
level track by the river-side, but, as afterwards appeared, we 
ought to have turned to the left up a creek which was hardly 
noticed at the time, none of the men knowing this part of the 
country. Lagrace had a general idea of the road, but he 
found himself at fault when we suddenly came to a mountain 
which stood right across our path, apparently forbidding far- . 
ther progress, for 16 was no better than a chaos of rocks and 
. great broken stones, past which the stream, now very small, 
rushed by in a deep and impassable channel. , 

‘Leaving the rest to wait his return, Lagrace scrambled up 
the mountain to search for a pass, while, with the same object, 
I set out in another direction, followed by Whisky,—who 
has a mania for climbing, though he squeaks on coming to the - 
difficult places ;—and, taking ‘my rifle with me, I was re- 
warded for a very hard walk by shooting a ptarmigan—or at 


CHAP. XIV. . TO KOOTANIE PLAIN. 229 


least a bird exactly like one. There was a covey of them 
seated on the bare top of a rocky hill, and when disturbed 
they flew round the knob and alighted at a short distance. I 
missed my second shot,—which at dinner next day I rather 
lamented, recognising a true grouse flavour in the bird, which 
made it very superior to the tasteless “partridge,” of the 
piie-forests.* 

‘On returning, I found that M‘Kay had got all the horses 
to the top of the hill by a path that seemed quite impracticable, 
for it” was not only exceedingly steep, but composed of very 
sharp many-cornered blocks, much the size of a cart, lying 
at different levels,=-near one another, but sufficiently apart 

> to leave great deep holes between, where knife-like smaller 
stones did not fill the openings. 

‘At the summit was a nearly perpendicular wall of hard 
frozen snow, about twenty feet high. Steps were cut, and the 
horses dragged up with ropes. They ascended without acci- 
dent, except Blond, who slipped on a sheet of ice just as he 
got to the top, and fell to the bottom, crushing our pots and 
kettles, but damaging himself very little, as his packs saved 

DN. him. -Rowland positively refused to go up, so he was taken 


4 


"a long way round, and the men carried his packs up the icy 
stair”? [I did not see the horses taken up,fbut was at the 
place immediately afterwards, while they werg still there. It 
“was an almost incredible feat, though per less really 
wonderful than the. previous ascent of the hill” among the 
separated blocks of stone. ] 
‘We now saw before us a flat gravel-covered valley entirely 
* Tetrao (Lagopus) Mutus. The Plarmagan. Ricuarpsoy, Faun, Bor. 
Am., vol. ii, p. 350. In the same work, Sir John speaks of the extreme 
rarity of specimens, stating that he never himself met with this variety in the 
fur-countries. As far asa non-scientific observer may judge, Iam certain that 
the bird shot by me was identical with the Scotch ptarmigan. 


rN 


230 ' | NORTH RIVER CAMP CHAP. xry, 


enclosed by mountains, the sides of those farthest off bearing 
great masses of snow, among which the river took its rise, 
flowing onwards in several shallow channels. Near the snow 
on our left (that is, towards the eastern side) appeared a 
lower ridge, and this was our only hope, for unless fortunate 
enough to pass over it and arrive at some other valley, we 
had no choice but to go back, losing several days and all the 
heavy toil of men and horses. 

‘The ridge, though steep, was in time ascended, and to our 
great joy there was a practicable road down a watercourse on 
the other side ; but we long remained in suspense, being only 
able to see our way step by step, and always dreading that 
“un rocher coupé” might blight our prospects. No difficulties, 
however, existed, and by evening we found ourselves com- 
fortably encamped at the ‘side of a mountain stream which 
evidently flowed towards the Saskatchewan, the direction in 
which we had intended to travel. 

‘There were several very old remains of an Indian encamp- 
ment where we halted, but I doubt if any human being ever 
came to the place by~our road; certainly no white man ever 
did, 

‘Going along the valley I shot three siffleurs, but two of 
them rolled into their holes and could'not be recovered. We 
saw and heard numbers of the little marmots peculiar to these 
mountains, They are of the size of a rat and the shape of a 
guinea-pig, their colour is grey-green, ‘their cry a complaining 
whine. * 

*This variety I: believe to be exceedingly rare out of its own limited 
district, I am inclined to identify it with a peculiar little animal described 
by Sir John Richardson—Lepus ¢{Lagomys) Princeps,-- The Litt/e-Chief Hare : 
Buckathre Kah-yawxe — Indians. . Length of head and body 6 inches 9 


lines. ‘‘ On the approach of a inan,:it utters a feeble cry, like the squeak 
of a rabbit when hurt.” Ricuarpsox,—Saun. Bor.-Adn., vol. i. p. 227. 


CHAP, X aN. 


[I was afterwards given at one of the Forts (I regret 
to have forgotten which) an Indian robe composed of the 
skins of a small animal of the marmot species. The robe 
measures 80 inches by,69, and contains 105 complete skins, 
besides twenty, which have been more or less cut to fill in- 
terstices in the pattern,—125 distinct pieces in all. } 

The ‘largest skins are 10 inches long, though a little 
shortened in squaring them into convenient shape, so that, 
adding 3 inches for the head, the animal would seem to 
have been about 13 inches in length, exclusive of the tail. 
The tails measure about 4 inches, and hang loose upon ‘the 
surface, combining with small strips of skin along the various 
seams to form a succession of curious ornamental fringes. 

The skins vary in colour from brown to silver-grey along 
the back, which is mottled all over with little whitish spots. 
The stomach and lower parts:are of a yellowish grey, sometimes 


almost approaching to pale orange. In size and colouring ~ 


the animal appears to correspond with an inhabitant of the 
northern part of the fur-countries—“ Arctomys (Spermophilus) 
Parryi.— Parry's Marmot,  Seck-seck-—— Esquimaux. —Tha- 
thing ny (Rock-badger) — Chipewyans.” RIcHARDsoN,— Houn. 
Bormz -Am., vol. i. p. 158.] 

Septemiber 16th,—The horses were vety much fatigued 
with'-yesterday’s work, for, besides their “toil, they had had 
nothing to eat till evening, so we settled to give them half 
a day to rest and recruit.’ , - a 

Availing myself of the interval, I went out with Antome 
to look for sheep. We almost immediately saw some fine, 
old rams, but they discovered us, and made their escape t0 » 
- the opposite mountain, stringing wp a vast and nearly per- 
‘pendicular wall of glittering rock, along invisible paths where _ 
no human foot could follow. Soon afterwards, observing six, 


he 


2 


932 NORTH RIVER CAMP CHAP. XIV. 


ewes on the top of a detached crag, we climbed round the 
face of it till we got within shot, and were fortunate enough 
to kill all but one of the number—three falling to my rifle 
and two to Antoine’s,—which furnished us with a welcome 
supply of fresh meat, for there was not a fortnight’s dry 
provision in camp. : 

One of the sheep was struck by my shot while running 
from us in a direct line ; on receiving the bullet she threw 
her hind-legs straight into the air, and danced for half-a- 
minute on her forelegs, in what seemed a scarcely possible 
attitude. ; 

‘The men were busy to-day in mending their moccasins. 
These soft shoes [leather socks one might call them] are 
‘very comfortable in dry, hot weather, but moisture soaks 
through them in an instant, and, though they do admirably 
for level ground, I find them slippery on the hill, and no 
protection against stones and thorns, When the weather is 
cold they are bad wear for horseback, as one’s feet get chilled 
in the stirrups. But for a pair of nailed shooting-boots, I 
could not have got along at all in the-mountains, which are 
more covered with sharp stones than any ground I have seen 
im Scotland. Even my men, accustomed to nothing but 
moccasins, are constantly bruising and cutting their’ feet ; 
they sometimes wear out a new pair of soles in a few hours. 

‘The best moccasins are made of ‘moose leather : red-deer 
- (wapiti) is very soft, but too thin; buffalo is exceedingly 
poor both in look and quality. They are generally made in 
three pieces ; one forming the slipper that encloses the foot ;: 
anothef covering ‘the instep, running upwards ‘in a tongue 
over the front of the ankle, and finished in a semi-oval at the 
lower end ; the third wrapping round the ankle, concealing 
the upper part of the second piece, and tied sandal-fashion 


bs 


CHAP. XIV, TO KOOTANIE PLAIN. 233 


with a strip of thin leather passed through cyclets round the 
heel. The part that comes over the instep is usually covered 
with red, blue, or white cloth, and ornamented with em- 
broidery in beads or dyed horse-hair. In Red River this 
part is made much larger, and lower over the foot, than in 
Saskatchewan ; generally, also, the toe is less pointed, and 
the ankle-covering less hich. 

‘The embroidering of men’s moccasins with flower patterns 
is not to be commended, it has a tawdry, effeminate appear- 
ance; but, indeed, I have seldom scen any bead-embroidery 
of good taste, except among the pure Indians, who, for such 
work, prefer geometrical devices to imitations of natural 
objects. 

‘Tt is singular how invariably the avt-instinct of the 
primitive savage guides him to that correct judgment which 
civilised nations only attain (if they do attain it) after 
centuries of thought and experiment,—as youth loses the 
grace of childhood without for many years acquiring the 
stately comeliness of maturity. So in religion, also, the 


child instinctively knows those truths, which, lost amidst a 
lifetime of. reasonings and controversy, old age sometimes ~ 


regains ;—as in thé case of John Wesley, who after trying 
Ritualism, Mysticism, and Moravianism, and devising a new. 
system of his own, during all which processes he strenuously 
battled against those who ditl.not accept his most recently 
adopted creed, yet'in his old age saw the vanity and vexation 
of such janglings, and thus expressed himself :-—“I am sick 
of opinions—my soul loathes this frothy food.” , [The whole 
passage runs thus :—“I am sick of opinions : I-am weary to 
bear them: my soul ‘Ioathes this frothy food. Give me solid 
and substantial religion : give me an humble lover of God and 


~ 
“man ; a man full of mercy “and good faith “iv laying: 
\ on a : 
aN Sa a \ 
\ . \ 
™~, : 
_~ Lf 
_ is gs ce ge . 


4 


234 NORTH RIVER CAMP CHAP. XIV. 


himself out in the work of faith, the patience of hope, the 
labour of love. Let my soul be with these Christians, where- 
soever they are, and of whatsoever opinion they are of”— 
SoutuEy,—Life of Wesley, vol. ti. p. 94. 3d edition.] 

‘Is Europe beginning to draw near this ripening of judg- 
ment? There are some signs of it. Were Christ to come 
again, would-he not, as once before, take a little child and set 
‘him in our midst ?’ 

September 17th—The night was cruelly cold: it was, 
almost impossible to sleep. Breakfasting early, we made our 
way down a wild and rugged glen, along which we toiled till 

evening without rest or food, confined mostly to the bed of a 
"torrent 0 stony as to hurt the horses’ feet: our direction 
tended always to the south-east. At length we arrived at 
the valley's end, where the water escaped through a long, 
narrow, deep gorge of rock, then crossed the shoulder of a 
mountain covered with lying-wood, and finally camped. near 
the Saskatchewan, half-asday ftom Kootanie Plain* > 

—‘The valley we have left is enclosed on the east by a 
precipitous wall of mountains of a pearly grey colour, com- 
posed of a hard stone lying in layers, like slates cut diamond 
shape and plac ¢ iat side outwards, so that the cliff is scored 
with parallel jagged ‘lines. The length “of this mountain 
barrier seems to be about ten miles, its height perhaps two 
thousand feet [above the stream] ; in many places it ,is 
nearly perpendicular, and the summit forms a continuous , 
serrated line. .* 

‘Saw traces of bears alkealdtg, ub the beasts “keep them- 
selves oub of sight. . "Phe Wind was excessively cold ;—I felt 


* If memory does not deceive me, it was in a small strip of wood near this 
camp that some of my men saw -a Flying-Squirrel. Pteromys Sabrinus. 


var. 8. Alpinus.—— Rocky Jfountain Flying-Squirrel. Ricwarnsoy,— Faun. 
Bor.-Am., vol. i, p. 195. 


E 


z ee 
e an 


ae ae eS 
_ 5 


eh 


Rota 


Ba 
Bae 
Gee 
EAP g 
Tae 


skates PO 
Pee tet She 
a neue 


Me pea 
| 


2 
oe 
" ‘\, 
Safety Sasi 


fy 
a 


2 al , 
Ne 
PER MEE 
aE tes 


tie Stn 
FEMEOISEN, 


. 


pancaet 


ere 


RE 


na aett 


PN 


BF cet) 


Curhecb teen 


i tt ne mat 


rer cE . 3 *: % etetehee 
SRR TEES 2 i > « ARES 


ary 
ayer g 


we 


pe et 
fs 
“a OF wd 


Yes sees 


rats i 


fe 


ie 
Fy 


’ 


ee 


Evie 
Ae eee 
Fiabe a 


ww 


CHAP, XL¥. . TO KOOTANIE PLAIN. 935 


half dead with hunger besides, having eaten nothing all 
day. -At supper I astonished myself, consuming at least three 
pounds of fried sheep: Toma could not cook the slices quick 
enough. 

—‘Finished that noble play “The Merchant of Venice.” 
Had there been a fair tribunal, and another “second Daniel” - 
to take Shylock’s part, I think the Jew would have come better 
out of it. It was mere quibbling to make him guilty of 
attempting the life of a citizen. You do not attempt a man’s 
life by accusing him before a court of justice of .a capital 
crime, in the same sense as by stabbing him with-a dagger. _ 

‘Are we to understand that Shylock, Judas-like, com- 
mitted suicide when he left the court? There ; is something 
peculiar in his exclamation, “J am not well.” A man of 
his stern character would have scorned to acknowledge any 
feeling of illness at such a time, unless he intended to end 
illness and, health alike by ending his life. ‘ Besides, he would 
never really have consented to become a Chfistian, and his 
ready acceptance of that condition showed that he meant to 
break it,—and.for that.there was but one way.’* 

Sunday, September 18th. — Wé marched a few miles, in 
a southerly direction, up the course of the North Saskat- 
chewan, and halted at Kootanie Plain. This so-called plain is 
merely an inconsiderable enlargement of the valley,—a space 
of ‘some fifty acres, bare of trees, and covered with .short 
- prairie grasses.’ 


1 


_ * See Appendix. - 


ee 


CHAPTER XV. 


\ 


KOOTANIE PLAIN TO OLD BOW FORT. 


SEPTEMBER 19th.—The river Saskatchewan, though here 
-not far from its souree, is g about forty yards in width, wherever 
it flows in a simgle chanpél, and so deep that we were obliged 
to cross it on Safts. While the ferrying went on, I ascended 
the mountains with Antoine in search of white goats ; we saw 
none, however, but fell in with a number of female sheep, one 
of which J shot without much trouble ; it was a very fine ewe, 
fat and well-conditioned, though in milk. 

The crossing safely effected, we travelledalong a broad track 
up the river, but’ discovering, after having followed it a good 

. many miles, that it was leading us out of our proper course, we 

returned, and camped in the dark near our place of departure. 

There was a high wind from the south, and towards night- 
fall rain came on. 

September 20th.—A cold showery day. We succeeded in 
_ finding the right Bow River road ; it passed not far from the 

“mountains that form the north side of the valley which runs 

eastward from opposite Kootanie Plain, and proved to be an 
excellent track, leading over ha ‘d ground through a long extent 
of thick fir-woods. There weletraces of recent travellers, 
whom we supposed to have been Americans going to the 
Columbia,—said to be not more than three days’ march from 
this neighbourhood. 

Matheson, who had lately had an attack of pains and 


cuar. xv, KOOTANIE PLAIN TO OLD BOW FORT. 237 


sickness, was NOW quite recovered, some of my simple reme- 
dies perfectly meeting his case, but to-day another man was 
taken ill,—our interpreter, Piskan Munroe. He was seized 
with violent cramps in the stomach, a complaint he had 
suffered from before, and, without consulting any one, was 
rash enough to prescribe for himself, swallowing a whole 
charge of gunpowder mixed with water, which he declared 
~ had formerly done him good. As he seemed in great agony, 
bending with groans over his horse’s neck when the fits 
attacked hin, I decided on an early halt, though only half 
our usual day’s march had been accomplished. 

Candles now becoming scarce, Toma manufactured one 
for me ; it was composed of sheep-fat run into a mould of 
stout cartridge paper, and burned remarkably well, nearly 
equalling wax in the clearness of its flame. 

A very high gale arose from the south, the quarter whence 
_ Wind and rain generally appeared to comé. Several tracks of 
moose; wéré ‘Seen near the toad-sides. " 

September Q1si. —‘ Munroe: “better. Of early;and made a 
long march up, the velley, at first through thick woods clear 
of fallen timber, » then-over a country scantily dotted with trees, | 
till Ve ar rived at the height-of-land Which divides the water- 
sheds'of the Saskatchewan and Bow rivers, There was a small 
tain allthe morning, and when we got up to the high table- 
: land this drizzle changed into a regular snowstorm. 

” «Tt, was very weary work crossing miles of bleak open 
moor, with not a tree/ i in sight, and only enough of the sur- 
rounding rocks and mountains visible through the mist to 
show how much noble scenery was being Jost to me for ever. 
For ever! That is too strong a word; who can tell what - 
powers of travel may be vouchsafed to the spirit after death ?’ 
[A-page.or two continuing this subject are obliterated.) 


238 KOOTANIE PLAIN OMAP. XY. 


‘Camped for the night a short way down the course of a 
stream that runs into the Bow River. Numerous traces of 
bears ; the earth was absolutely ploughed up in large patches 
whete they had been digging for roots. Shot two “partridges” 
with the rifle, and misaed two. 

“© One of the Carlton horses failed, and was left-on the road? 
§ September 22d—‘ Snow and sleet all night, continuing all 


te morning, We are now reduced to very simple fare, as 


Te e whole of the flour is finished. Dried sheep-meat (getting 


we 
\ 


mouldy), pemmican, and tea, are all we have. Thank God !-we 
have enough, and after the stomach is filled it matters little 
what has filled it, if only the food were wholesome. 

‘On coming to this side of the height-of-land, where the 
waters begin to flow east and south, I observe the larch again, 
a tree we have not seen since passing a few near Lake St. 
Ann. Here they grow on both sides of the valley, ‘chiefly 


» at a higher level than the spruce, which, in turn, grows higher 
-up than the Scotch fir. These larches do not show the droop- 


ing habit of the kindred tree at home, but grow more in the 
cedar form, with branches that are horizontal or tending 
upwards. Their foliage is now of a bright pale yellow, which 
contrasts effectively with the dark green of the firs? 
September 23d— After marching a few miles we arrived 
at an open spot by the river, and camped there early, as 1 
wished to devote the rest of the day to hunting for white 
goats, being anxiong to get some specimens of those scarce and 


very wary animals, The morning was unpromising when An- 


_- boine and I set ont on our hunt ; stornis of sleet went drifting 


‘ by, and a’ thick mist envelopedthe snow-clad mountains ; never- 


heless we persevered, climbed several steep hills, and ex- 
~ploied many likely places, but all in vain. 
Towards evening we saw a band of ‘grey sheep, and re- 


CUAP. XV. TO OLD BOW FORT. 239 


solved to go after them, as there was no- further chance of 
goats. It cost us a hard climb to get within range, but they 
took the alarm and only offered us awkward running chances, 
of which we made nothing, though perhaps I ought to have 
killed with one of my shots, In the excitement of the moment 
Antoine spoiled the little chance I had, by hurrying me on, and 
making various signs and speeches, before it was possible for 
me to see the sheep. . ; 

‘A stalker should remember two things—Ist, That, as he 

_ goes in front of the person he is guiding, he must generally 
(uphill always) see the animals before they are visible to the 
other man, and ought therefore to bear with some slow- 
ness on the part of his companion in seeing what he points 
out the moment it meets his own view. 

‘2dly, That most people are slightly nervous on coming in 
after a long stalk, and out of breath besides, so’that excited 
demonstrations at such times do the greatest harm. 

‘The best plan is quietly to beckon your companion for- 
ward—quickly or slowly according to circumstances,—and 
in one short sentence give him any directions that may be 
really necessary, such as—-“The large beast on the left ;” 

“The second from the front,”—and 80 on.’ 

“ Few things.amore show man’s inherent conceit, than our 
‘habit of thinking that nothing can be done without our own 
valuable directions. As we marched through the plains I 
have often been amused , to hear the whole party shouting 

gpogether—fo any one going after prairie-fowl near the road- 
side :—That’s the way! No, more to your lett! There he 
goes behind “the bush! Shoot him now! Not that one! 
No, the other, the other!—while the unfortunate sportsman 
danced about ikea Highlander in a wasp’'s nest. 

‘Except with arrabsoliite greenhorn, it is better to leave a mis 


en 


& — 


240 KOOTANTE PLAIN CHAD, Xv. 


man to his own judgment when the decisive moment comes, 
—particularly in rifle-shooting, where your own unaided 
choice of the animal to be shot greatly assists the aim, 
harmonising the nerves and enabling you to shoot exactly at 
the right moment? 

After the sheep we had been firing at had moved away, 
Antoine observed a single ewe on a rock above us. I 
climbed to within. fair distance, and wounded her severely, too 
low, however, and far back, so she had strength to run a long 
way over some very rough and broken ground. _ Tracking her 
by the blood spots—clear red circles on the chalky stones, 
—TI followed to the very summit of the height, where the 
gradual upward slope abruptly stopped at a tremendous over- 
hanging precipice, which formed thé other side of the mountain. 
The sheep was not to be seen, hut ‘logking’ carefully over the 
brink, I discovered her standing ona Tarrow ledge a few yards 
beneath me ; there was no way to approach nearer, so I gave 
her a finishing shot, on receiving which she rolled off the plat- 
form, and, falling many hundreds of feet, dropped upon the 
rocks and ice in the desolate abyss below. 

Thinking all was over, I shtitldered my rifle and returned 
to Antoine, little expecting to bking any of that wild-mutton 
home for supper. 

The’stout old hunter, however, at once proposed to go for 
our sheep, and after a considerable round we nianaged to 
reach the place where it was lying, much cut and broken, 


but not spoilt for use; then putting it on his back, he car- 4 


ried it for more than a mile, till we found our horses again,—no 
mean performance, considering the roughness of the ground 
and the weight of this two-year-old ewe, a beast certainly 
larger than a common roe-deer. 

September 24éh.— After marching a few miles we observed 


TO OLD BOW FORT. 241 


CHAP, XV. 


four white goats, half-way up a rocky mountain, upon which 
I halted the brigade, and set out on foot, with Antoine, in 
pursuit of them. We had a very severe climb to the place 
where they had been seen, and then found they had gone on. 
Antoine followed on their track, and I kept a little higher, 
till we came to a deep ravine, when he suddenly stopped and 
beckoned to me. I came on, making all possible haste, but 
the rock unluckily was of broken shale, over which one: 
cannot go fast, and I was only in time to see the white fleeces 
streaming off along way below. We both fired in vain, and 
then rushed off to intercept them, but they gained the ridge 
long before we did, though running with all our might. 

‘Never did I feel more utterly prostrated. From various 
causes—my long journey on horseback, bad sleep owing to 
the cold at night, indifferent food of late, no drink stronger 
than tea, sudden hard work on foot since we came to the 
mountains, perhaps also owing to "the height, above the sea- 
level, of the valleys among which we were ;—I- was now very 
weak, and only able to climb steep places slowly, and with 
constant rests, 

‘T had set my heart on getting some of these white goats ; 
but we were not likely to see any of them farther on our 
journey, my last chance seemed gone; I lay there on the 
mountain side, weary, almost fainting with toil, and very sore 
at heart. These goats began to seem to me like the enchanted 
beasts in German stories, which lure men to destruction, and _ 
then mock at their misery. Once I had nearly broken my 
neck, and twice nearly burst a blood-vessel, in following them, 
~—~and all in vain, A sort of frenzy came over me, and I 
vowed to pursue them to the death. 

‘We followed their track some way till it turned straight 


: “up the cliffs to the top of the mountain ; Antoine then lighted 


R 


249 KOOTANIE PLAIN “car. xv. 


his pipe and prepared to descend. I proposed to go up, and 
he at once cheerfully consented. We had hard and dangerous 
work. [The cliff, which rose abruptly from a narrow ledge 
of shingle slanting to tremendous precipices, was éxceedingly 
steep, and the projections on its half-decomposed surfic8 were 


“but small, and so loosely attached that they constantly broke ° 
wee ata touch] In many places Antoine had to cut out steps 


with his knife in the brittle shale, and the melting snow from 
above rendered our footing slippery and unsteady, all the 
worse that our rifles left only one hand free. It was terrible 
to hear the dislodged stones falling down to unknown depths 
in the abyss beneath ; but the only way to climb rocks is to 


shut the door on fancy, and rivet the eyes and mind on the 


spot where one’s foot is to be next planted. The toil was 
severe ; several times we were nearly defeated, but at length 
the summit of the cliffwas gained. =~ 

‘We then made a long ascent over broken rocks to a 
higher ridge, which formed the actual top of that part of the 
mountain, and rested there a while amidst ice and snow. 
Immediately beneath us a most singular view presented 
itself—an immensely deep, oval, crater-like hollow, of the most 


verdant grass, embedded in the heart of the mountain. At. 


the bottom of it there was a beautiful lake, blue, as a sap- 
phire, and framed in with a narrow band of firs-and larehes. 

‘Alas! the goats were not to be seen, and after a long 
search we began descending some steep rocks in a different 
direction—utterly in despair. 

‘When about half-way down, Antoine, who was continu- 
ally climbing rocks and looking about him, signed to me that 
somethitig was in sight. Coming to him, I observed two of 
the enchanted beasts feeding below. He proposed to ascend 
again and come down on them, but I was quite unable,—so 


fr 


CHAP. XV. TO OLD BOW FORT. 943 
‘ . oa “ee 
we climbed along the face of the cliff on a very narrow ledge, 
and got within long range of the-two goats, and within 120 
yards of three others, which we had not seen before, 
‘We fired several shots, but without stopping any of them, 


and being so high above their level, as well as so far off, it 


was difficult to judge.df any were wounded, At that moment - 


the old ewe I had first shot at, confused by the echoes, came 
’ trotting back, but, having had time to reload, I rolled her 
‘over, At the same time Antoine wounded a three-year-old 
male, who began to rush off at a great pace, but I stopped 


him with a really,good-shot, right in the centre of the back- 


bone, at‘more than 150 yards. Both these goats unfoytunately 
fell over some twehty feet of rock, breaking their horns and 
tearing great; “holes in their skins, but I was glad to get them 
on any terms. 

‘These animals belong to the goat tribe, and are true goats 
in appearance. They are rather smaller than the grey sheep, 
and much shorter in the leg, and larger in the feet. Their 
horns are straight, hard, and pointed, of a shining black, and 
about 6 inches long, resembling those of the chamois, only 
not hooked at'the end, (Perhaps the old males may have 
longer horns. I -never saw one near enough to make’ sure: 
they: are certainly not very long-horned.) Their hair is long 
and white, and very soft ; they have beards like common goats, 


: sand the males have a strong musky smell It is generally said’ | 


that” Shey are not good to eat, but we carried parts of them 
hoine to try, and I could perceive little difference in taste from 
the sheep. The old males no doubt would be uneatable.* 


* Capra Americana. ocky Mountain Goat. Ovis Montana—Ord, 1817. 
Antilope Lanigera—Smith, 1822. ‘Long straight hair, considerably coarser 
than the wool of sheep, but softer than that of the common goat. 

Under the hair of the body there is a close coat of fine white wool [* fully an 
inch and ahalflong”].” Ricwanpsox,—Feun, Bor.-Am., vol. i, pp. 268-270. 


t 


4 


944 . KOOTANIE PLAIN CHAP. XY. 


‘Tt was pitch dark before we got back to camp. ,On 
‘arriving at the river-side we found horses waiting, which the 
men had brought over in answer to our shouts. The crossing 
was almost amusing, there was such uncertainty as to the 
depths into which one’s horse’s next step might plunge-one ; — 
we got through, however, without accident.’ 

Sunday, September. _25th—All night and morning there 
was a steady pour of rain. Our camping-place was damp 
and confined, so we determined to leave it at once, ,and 
marched, accordingly, till 'we reached the Bow River, then 
travelled'some distance down its course. Our road ran mostly 
through thick forest, and towards evening it became hilly 
and blocked with lying-wood. 

Darkness_came on very suddenly, and M‘Kay and Mathe- 
son, Who had stayed behind to arrange some of the packs, 
were unable to join us, and had to camp by themselves. 
They were better off than we were, having the tents and 
.provision-stores with them; but it signified little, for we 
managed to find sufficient food and covering—Klino, indeed, 
raised me a shelter, by stretching the oil-cloth over poles, 
which answered quite as well as my own canvas tent. 

Showery, cold weather ; rain again at night. The Carlton 
Bichon, who had been ill some time, got worse to-day, and 
finally gave out. . 

September 26th.—After about four miles’ march we met an 
Assiniboine walking along the track by himself; he turned 
back with us, and soon afterwards we came to four families 
of the same tribe.* We halted and campéd in their neigh- 


“A tribe of the Dacotah race, an offshoot of the Sioux. The mountain 
bands are commonly Known as “ Stonies,” or “Stone Indians,” the word 
Assiniboine signifying—“ one who boils stones,” a name referring to their 
ancient manner of cooking, ~ on 


CHAP, XV. TO OLD BOW FORT. 245 


bourhood ; our hope being to get food and horses from the 
Indians,—theirs, to procure ammunition, clothes, and tobacco, 
in exchange. 

—‘I have just made the unpleasant discovery that we 
have barely two days’ provision in the camp. Our dried meat 
had become mouldy, and during my absences when hunting 
there has been shameful waste of our pemmicdn, some of the 
men, I am told, eating it all day long. This evil begans at a 
time when there was so much fresh meat that I took no notice 
of the constant cooking and feasting, anda general system of 
waste and gluttony thus crept in. Now that it was too late, 
I had found out our perilous.situation. Jt was impossible to 
get to Edmonton under a fortnight, and, except § some ducks, 
there was little chance of any game on the road. 

‘Great gloom overspread the camp. I did my best to seem 
cheerful. I divided all the pemmican into portions—there 
was only enough for two days and a half—and served the 
tea out in allowances: for my own part, I ate some of the leg 
of the larger white goat brought in on Saturday. The old 
ewe must have reared a dozen kids at least;—tougher and 
drierfare I never fed on.... Read “Romeo and Juliet.” 

‘In hopes of getting assistance, we sent off the hunter we 
_ had first fallen in with toa larger camp of his tribe, a good dis- 
tance away, to ask them to join us on the road. In the evening 
I heard the Indians singing hymns. They are Christians, 
having had some teaching from Protestant missionaries, and 
seem to be most religious, excellent people’ 

During to-day’s march we passed the site of a camp. On 
one of the neighbouring trees was written—“ Exploring Ex- 
pedition. Aug. 23, 1859. Dr. Hector.” 

September 27th—The Indiaas, who were absent when we 
arrived, had now returned from their hunt. They had killed 


~ 246 — ‘KOOTANIE PLAIN CHAP. XV. 


three moose, two of which avere very far off, but the other, 
which was nearerythey had gone to bring in for us. As 


further supplies were urgently required, I set out to look for, 


sheep, though very unfit for much exertion, and ascended the | 
mountain directly at the back of our camp. ‘It wasa hard — 


climb, but Duncan (who was my only companion) carried my 
rifle: I could hardly carry myself, I felt so weak. [A strange 
sort of illness had come over me,—I could walk easily on 
level ground, but if the least hill -began, ‘my knee sinews 
lost their strength, and every step was painful] 

‘ When we reached the summit nothing was to be seen but 
rock and precipice, the whole upland valley between us and 


the farther mountain tops being a great basin of hard smooth ~ 


stone, broken here and there with fissures—much like a ttact 
of rocky sea-coast left bare at low water. Great masses of 
snow covered Sage of the slopes, and the scene was one of 
utter desolation 780 We went but a short distance, and returned 
another way, ‘having some dangerous precipices to descend, 
and several miles of lying-timber to cross,’ 
The Stonies duly brought in the moose. I paid them 
well, buying also at a liberal price two white goat-skins and 
-two moose-skins, to their very evident gratification. M'Kay 
then began to deal with them for horses,—of which they had 
a pretty fair lot, but nothing really good, except a fine chest- 
nut, which had formerly belonged to the Blackfeet.. 

"On asking the owner about it, he declared that he had 
many a time refused fo part with this horse to his own 
people, and had even refused it to Dr. Hector, as it was his 
favourite, and the only buffalo-runner they had; neverthe- 
less, as he saw we were in want of horses, he would consult 
his wife, and consider if the sale were possible. He then 
talked very religiously, saying that they were “ poor people 


x 


aS, 


CHAP. XV. TO OLD BOW FORT. 247 


living h e in the wilderness, thankful to God for the food 

. He supplied them with in hunting, which was all they had 

for their families.” What they most wanted, he added, was to 

-héar' about God-and be more instructed in religion. M‘Kay 

suggested to me that I should write out the Lord’s Prayer, 

to. be trduslated for them into Cree, which one of the women 

understood and could speak. I promised to do so, and, in 

regard to the chestnut, I told him that I would not take the 

poor man’s best horse, but would buy from him another, 
which, though lame, might go as far as Edmonton. 

‘It was. then settled that Lagrace should be added to 
M‘Kay’s mess—partly to equalise the messes, partly to keep 
the old fellow’s wasteful habits under control.’ 

- September 28th—To fulfil my promise, [ wrote out a 
number of sentences from the New Testament, choosing those 
of a simple and encouraging character ; I also wrote out the 
Lord’s Prayer and the Apostles’ Creed, as far as ‘the words 
“judge the quick and the dead.” 

‘M‘Kay then read the whole, in Cree, to the Stonies, who 
were much interested ; but afterwards told us that they had 


new. As none of them could read Cree, .we ° did not ,trans- 
late the paper into writing, but they asked leave to keep it, 
as it was, “to remind them of the godd things it contained.” 

‘The man we had spoken with about the chestnut ‘now 
said that he had determined I should have his best horse ; 
that he would not sell me the bad one; that he would “willingly 
give me the horse for the sake of hearing these things about 
God.” © 

‘He-absolutely insisted on my taking it, one way or other; 
we therefore exchanged for it Lane (who would soon have failed, 
but will perfectly recover with rest), and I gave him, besides— 


7: ai N 


248° KOOTANIE PLAIN CHAP. xv. 


~ a gun, blankets, tobacco, ammunition for the winter, a capot 
and some cloth, a knife, files, etc., everything, in short, that I 
could spare, considering the necessity of buying provisions and 
exchanging other horses on the way:to Edmonton. The poor 
fellow was pleased and grateful, and thanked God for sending 
white men to him and his people. , 
‘In all this we see the hand of Providence. Had we not 
met these Indians we should have been reduced to great 
+ straits, and must.soon have become very short of horses. They 
again had very little powder, and no lead—they were using 
bits of iron for bullets,—no tobacco, and only very ragged old 
leather clothing Now, they were well supplied, and we 
“were provisioned for a week, and had got two stout fresh 
horses ;—for I also exchanged Spot, with a number of things, 
for a useful beast belonging to another of the Indians.’ 


While the men . Were settling_about-their horses, all the 
wives and children came to my tent door, so I gave them 
.& quantity of trinkets, besides a few more serviceable articles. 

~ It was.amusing to see the delight with which one old womait 
received a “small-tooth” comb—certainly it seemed needed. 
I was able to bestow one of these on each tent, having 
packed a few among my stores, hearing that the Indians 
fancied them. After this, I brought out some lengths of 
coloured gartering, and invited the women, beginning at the 
oldest, to take their choice of the pieces. The senior imme- 

es “Sa diately fixed on the green,-the next took the red, and the 
‘two yellow rolls remained for the other ladies, 

t interested me to watch the children playing with the 
young horses, as roughly and familiarly as if amusing them- 
selves with pardogs. or lambs. , They climbed over them, sat 
on their backs, made. them walk, waded them in the shallows 
of the river; they even-tied lines to one of their gentle play- 


CHAP. XY. TO OLD BOW FORT. | 249 


fellows’ legs, and tugged away till they fairly pulled him 
down. The horses seemed to enjoy it, and never showed the 
least signs of temper, nor tried to escape from their kindly 
little tyrants. 

An Indian, evidently far gone in consumption, came to 
my tent for medicine. Telling him that I had none quite 
suitable for his #finess, I gave him a thick flannel shirt, advis- 
ing him to weaNg next his skin under his own wretched leather 
coat. To my surprise he seemed disappointed, and earnestly 
repeated his request ‘for medicine. Though painful to de- 
celve the poor man, it seemed better to humour bim in 
his weak condition, so I opened my travelling bag, and pre- 
sented him with a few mild pills of no very particular sort. 
He went away delighted, thanking me heartily for a gift 
which he probably believed to possess some magical virtue.* 

_ About mid-day we moved from our camping ground, and 
travelled a good distance in course of the afternoon. 

September 29th.—It snowed a little during the night, and 
when we set out there was a high and bitterly cold north 
wind, which lasted the whole day. <A band of eight white 
goats came into view, but we had not time to go after them ; 
I shot, however, half-dozen “ partridges,” among them one 
very pretty bird with a ruff, which Toma said was of akind 
common about Lachine.* 

‘We encamped in a hollow sheltered by bushes, near the 
foot of “The Mountain where the Water falls,’—an isolated 
rocky mountdin in no way remarkable, except that a small 
stream runs down its face and loses itself in a hole in the € 
earth.’ 


*Tetrao Umbellus. Ruffed Grous. White-flesher, and Pheasant—Anglo- 
Americans. Puspusgweu— Crees. Total length of bird, 18 inches. Ricu- 
ARDSON,—-Faun. Bor.-Am., vol. ii, p. 342. 


950 KOOTANIE PLAIN CHAP, XV. _ 
+ 

Our Stony messenger met us on the road, bringing me a 
letter from his people, written in the Cree syllabic characters. 
It was translated to me_as follows—“We thank God for 
sending us such a great tian: we send our compliments to 
him : we will receive him as a brother.” 

September 30th.—‘ Slept better last night than any time 
since leaving Fort Garry. The morning was lovely,—sunny, 
but with a bracing chilliness in the air. 

‘Our progress was much interrupted by fallen timber at 
first, and afterwards by hilly stony ground, but we succeeded 
in turning the corner of the valley, at the end of which 
are the ruins of Old Bow Fort. It is a pretty vale. The 
river winds through it in a deep, still, dark blue current, and 
forms numerous shallow lakes alongside its course, which 


wee! TE separated from the stream, sometimes by reedy flats, 


sometimes by low wooded banks. 

‘Poplar brush is the principal growth in the lower 
grounds, and at this season the bright yellow of the dying 
leaves contrasts very beautifully with the dark pines that 
overspread the surrounding crags, often to their very top. The 
larch almost ceases in the Bow River valley, though a few 
are occasionally to be seen. From the neighbourhood of the 


Hill of the Water-fall to the extreme end of the mountains, 


we were constantly passing groups of really large pines— 
silver, spruce, and Scotch fir,—the greater number apparently 
about ten to twelve feet in girth, one silver fir, however, 
must have beer half as large again. 

‘Most of them bore traces of the fires which are the curse 
of this region, which have destroyed the beauty of these noble 
valleys, ruining the magnificent forests that ages had matured, 
and leaving in their stead endless tracts of charred and de- 
caying remains, 5, amidst which wretched seedlings struggle up 


6GS8! ,,60. YaaWa1d3s “SENIOGINISSV NIVINNOW BHI WOud HALLS 


BUI Ee 
cov Dea YI Jae esq 
‘su'Pdd& dp .Bd4 
: 1 270: vd qj bu a1904 Jd 


S17 wa -5 44 
WAP ye cone. als 


04dq puet2od sd 


CHAP. XV. TO OLD BOW FORT. 951 


as best they may. It grieves the heart of a lover of trees to 
travel through America. For hundreds and thousands of 
miles his eyes behold nothing but wholesale destruction of 
those noblest ornaments of the earth. Fire everywhere, the 
. axe everywhere, the barking-knife and,the bill-hook,—joint 
" ravagers with the story the lightning-end the flood,—all busy 
in pulling down nature’s forest handiwork—and who builds up 
anything in its stead ? ° 

‘If the half-breed wishes to do honour to a friend, he 
chooses the most conspicuous tree, prunes off all its branches, 
and calls it Friend So-and-so’s lob-stick:—thus he raises his 
monument. The American strips the greenery from whole 
provinces, then builds sawmills and log-houses, and calmly 
offers the exchange to the universe—like a knave who steals 
an Indian’s horse, and offers him a bottle of rum in its place : 
—thus he raises his monument. / 

‘The mountains become perceptibly lower.after one enters 
Bow valley, and continue to lessen in height at each succeed- 
ing great bend of the river, but their rocky character remains 
unchanged. We were still among them when evening drew 
on, and such a gale of wind arose from the west that we 
hastened to camp ourselves in the heart of a thick young 
wood to escape its fury.’ 

Toma cooked me some moose-nose for dinner :—‘ cartilage 
and fat like beaver’s tail—very good. 


ee) 
ee 


% 


CHAPTER XVI. 
OLD BOW FORT TO FORT EDMONTON, 


‘By mid-day we arrived at Old Bow Fort (a deserted settle- 
ment of the Hudson’s Bay Company), all heartily glad to 
leave the mountains, amidst whose rugged passes we have 
lost three horses, and seen most of the others become walking — 
skeletons, footsore and feeble; where we have consumed all 
our provisions, and endured much unseasonable cold. 

. ‘For my own part, I entirely share in the general joy. 
Grand as is the scenery of the Athabasca mountains, it has 
fallen short of my expectations, which looked for sky-piercing 
peaks and heights towering above the clouds, features by no 
means often discoverable even in the remoter ranges among 
which we travelled’ [The valleys we had passed through - 
being some 5000 feet above the sea, the mountains, as seen 
from them, lose to that extent in height as well as in gran- 
deur of character; thus elevations twice as great as Ben Nevis 
show hardly larger than the more lofty among the Scottish. 
or English hills, while ranges far higher than the rest do not 
exceed 7000 to 8000 feet in apparent altitude. According toi 
the Government Exploring Expedition, the peak immediately + 
above Kootanie Plain (no way remarkable so far as I remem- 
ber) is 8913 feet high ; while, nearly opposite, Mount Mur- 
chison (below which our track led us on the 21st of September) 
rises to a height of 15,789 feet, considerably surpassing Mont 


_ Blanc. Old Bow Fort, outside the mountains, and at the edge 


cuay. xvz, OLD BOW FORT TO FORT EDMONTON, 253 


of the plains, is 4100 feet above the sea, nearly equalling Ben 
Nevis, the highest point in Great Britain.] 

‘Then my _ Meicipations of sport Have been greatly disap- 
pointed, Ingfead of the hundreds of grisly bears I had been 
led to expect¥I have only seen one, and that at a distance.’ 
[Unless disturbed. in thetk, hiding-places, bears are seldom 
seen except at early dawn. By-knowing this I might have 
had better sport, for there were plenty of grislies about, to 
judge from their, numerous tracks. I half think that my 
people were not- “galous in tite matter, dreading the risk 
—for me more than themselyes—in a country so far from 
help in case of accident.] ‘Instead of white goats crowning 
every rocky height, or reposing in herds on the sunny slopes 
of the lower hills, I have seen but a few scattered bands, and 
only got two indifferent specimens, after toil that has left me 
so weak that I can scarcely carry my rifle. With the grey 
sheep only have I been fortunate ; and there also my success 
was obtained with great labour, except on two occasions. 

‘Every deerstalker knows the effort of climbing the first 
hill to get command over the ground, but be it remembered 
that in these mountains merely to reach the foot of the pre- 
cipices is a very steep ascent of more than a mile, made 
doubly difficult by the roughness of the ground and the ° 
quantity of thick brush and fallen timber through which a 
way has to be forced. And then, towering above you, there 
are hundreds of feet of bare and often slippery crags, which 
cannot be scaled without taxing every muscle to the utter- 
most. On the Ist of September I entered thé mountains 
with joy, on the Ist of October I leave them with greater joy.’ 

[Feelings scarcely comprehended at the time—of relief at 
_. throwing off a leaden-bondage, of warmth and brightness, of 
life and joy and freedom—were swelling in every heart. There ' 


254 . OLD BOW FORT CHAP. XVI. 


ig something appalling in the gloom of the deep mountain 
valleys which had so long been our home, confined within 
tremendous barriers of unmitigated rock,—a gloom most 
horrible when storms and mists prevail, and not altogether 
absent when the sun is pouring down wide figods of cheerful- 
ness. 

Words cannot Wesoribe the desolation of the cold grey 
dawn in these rock-bound valleys, when. heavy frost grapples 
the whole face of the earth, and nothing stirs with a full and 
energetic vitality except invisible creeping chills. The very 
mass and vastness of the mountains depress and daunt the 
soul ; scarcely can you look up at the blue sky without some 
portentous object sternly frowning-down ‘your gaze. Yous 
feel yourself imprisoned under some mighty ogre’s sway; the 
unassailable, prodigious potencies that beset you all around 
crush out your courage, “o’ercrow your spirit” quite. In 
leaving the mountains, we seemed to me to resemble the 
band of travellers in The Pilgrim's Progress, making their glad 
escape from Doubting Castle, the stronghold of that evil tyrant 
Giant Despair.] , 

‘The ruins of Bow Fort stand. ona high bank overhanging . 
the river, —here very rapid and about fifty yards wide. Look- 
ing eastward down the vale, the eye ranges far over extensive 
prairies, bounded by low hills, whose features are partly 
hidden by a few small woods occupying their slopes and: 
spreading into the valleys beneath. The colours of the foliage 
were most lovely in rich autumnal tints,—gold, olive, green, 
and crimson, according to the different varieties of trees that 
were grouped into clumps, or mingled together in the groves. 

‘The plains are all strewn with skulls and other vestiges. 

the buffalo, which came up this river last year in great 
numbers. They were once common inthe mountains, At - 


- rt 


_cuamxvny _, “£O FORT EDMONTON. 255 


the Kootanie Plain I observed some of their wallowing-places,* 
and even so high as a secluded little lake, near where the 
horses were taken up the ice-bank, I noticed certain traces of 
_-them. . “They are now rapidly disappearing everywhere : what 
' will be the fate of the Indians, when this their chief support 
"fails, it is painful to imagine. 

«Large as Were the herds I saw in July, they were nothing 
to what I have heard and read of, and there is reason to be- 
lieve that I then bebeld- -all the buffaloes belonging to the two 
Saskatchewan Valléys and the intervening country, pressed 
from various quarters_1 ints. ‘one great host. There were none 
near Edmonton, nonenear Pitt, none near Carlton, during the 
whole winter,—the “Pthabitdnts meanwhile almost starving. 
And now I learn that the Blackfeet have been compelled to., 
leave their usual settlements, and go far south in pursuit of 
their means of existence.’ 

As we approached Bow Fort, we were met by three 
Stonies, who came to inform us thai the rest were encamped 
close by. It appeared that they had neither fresh meat 
nor provisions of any kind, but that ve bounding-deer” (Le 
Chevrewil +) were plentiful in the neighbouring woods, where 
some of their young men were then engaged in hunting them. 
In the evening this party returned, having killed seven deer, 
upon which M‘Kay gave them supplies of ammunition, and 
sent them to the forest again on our account. : 

Antoine and I had already started on the same errand, 
riding Moutonne and Jasper, as we usually did when hunting 
or exploring together. We forded the, river, which was so 
deep and strong as nearly to carry the horses off their legs, 
‘and then made long search among the woods and poplar 

clumps, but without getting a chance, though we saw five 


* See footnote, p. 96. + See footnote, p. 113. 


7 


956 OLD BOW FORT gp «CHAP. XVI. 


of the chevrewils. It was dangerous, difficult work to recross 
the river, in the utter darkness that had set in by the time 
we reached its margin. 

*’ The water had somewhat risen since our former crossing, 
aud now came well above our knees, freezing our blood with 
its icy chill Jasper’s great strength made up‘fpr his want of 
size, and he contrived to hold his own, but, between the weight 
of the current and the darkness, we drifted out of the true 
line, and it seemed a very long journey before we landed on 

. the opposite side. 
‘Toma, and others of the party, had been fishing while we 
were away, baiting their hooks with pieces of raw meat, and 
had managed to catch fourteen fine trout, some of them as heavy 


as several pounds apiece, They were in excellent order, and - 


made an agreeable change in our rather monotonous suppers. 

October 2a,—A tremendous notth-westerly gale blew the 
whole nighi long. Being in a high and much exposed situa- 
tion we were quite unsheltered from its fury, and it beat upon 
us with terrific violence. My tent soon showed signs of yield- 
ing to the strain ; presently one of the poles broke across, and 
everything fell in a heap upon my body. No step could be 
taken to repair damages amidst the darkness and the raging 
storm, so | was doomed to pass a most uncomfortable night, 
feeling much as if beneath a gigantic fan, as the canvas flapped 
steadily to and fro, and drove eddies of air through every 
covering I could devise. 

On searching about near the fort, we had found the re- 
mains of a number of carts, left behind by Captain Blakiston 
and different American travellers, preparatory to making their 
entrance into the mountains ; and, as many parts of these 
vehicles were still in fair order, M‘Kay proposed that we 


- Should build ourselves new ones out ‘of the fragments. 
% 


a 


CHAP, XVI TO FORT EDMONTON. 257 


Pack saddles are the only conveyance adapted for mountain 
work, but in the plains carts are far preferable, one horse 
being able to draw more than me can carry ; besides which, 
the time occupied in removing the packs at every halt is 
saved, and the men are relieved from the labour of tying and 
untying all ##e leather thongs, a troublesome and difficult 
job in wet or frosty weather. 

We hoped™to have found harness also, but there were 
disappointed, for the cache made by Captain Blakiston had 
been. opened, and everything carried off. Matheson (having 
belonged to that party) had been present when the things 
were stored away, and perfectly remembered the place,— 
indeed we fownd a board with written directions, which would 
have guided us sufficiently had he been mistaken. 

-This mattered little, however, for M‘Kay at once engaged 


to make harness as well as carts. He was as good as his ic, 


word; by mid-day his work was finished, and we had the 
pleasure of seeing threé carts and their harness all complete ; 
the whole skilfully put together in a few hours by my handy 
men, who had a knack of overcoming tall difficulties, and 
making everything out of nothing at the shortest notice. 
[One of my shooting-boots having been cut by the rocks, 
Kline mended it as firmly as any professional cobbler could 
have done ; he also repaired: my telescope-case in the same 
workmanlike manner. | 

The storm having abated, we marched a few miles to a 
more sheltered place ; where all the Indians presently jomed 
us, forming their encampment close to mine. Soon afterwards 
the hunters came in, and brought us five chevrewils and a.goose, 
as the produce of our ammunition, so we were once again 
abundantly supplied. 

While some of the older Indians,were talking with us, [ 

8 


258 OLD BOW FORT CHAR. XVI, 


happened to notice a pipe, which one of the head men was hold- 
ing in his hand. ‘It was neatly carved out of, black slate-like 
stone, though the stem was merely a rough piece of fir. On 
hearing that I admired it, the owner immediately presented 
it to me with the most obliging politeness. I afterwards gave 
him in return some things that I found him tozbe in want of, 
adding two pair of my own woollen socks, which he received 
with interest, though evidently puzzled as to their exact use. 


e 


wos 


eS ASSINIUOLNE PIPE AND STEM. 


— At night a bell was rung in the. Assiniboine camp, and 
the Indians all- "joined ia singing “hymns, as they do every 
night. The service lasted some time. It was a-sort of chant, 
the men and women océisionally singing. in parts, Their 
preacher is an 1 tiga and venéfable man. He learned Chris- 

‘tianity from another Indian, I believe, but his’ gift of 
preaching is entirely self-developed. Mr. Woolsey had since 


CHAP. XVI. TO FORT EDMONTON. 259 


occasionally visited these people, who, as far as I could learn, 
are now well instructed in the Christian faith, and certainly 
carry out its precepts in their lives’ * 

October 3¢—The Indians’ dogs were exceedingly trouble- 


some all night long, making continual attempts to carry off 


our fresh meat, which was their particular attraction. Woke 
by these intruders several times, I went out and drove them 
away, but they always came back again as impudently as 
ever. There was a thin coating of snow on the ground this 
morning, the result of an easterly wind that began after the 
great gale had spent its force. 

—'T had been considering what I could do for these poor 
and most worthy Indians, and a plan having occurred to me, 
I sent for the chief man, and spoke to. hin as follows—M ‘Kay 
interpreting. I said—that I was very glad to have met them, 
‘and much pleased-by the kindness with which they had re- 
ceived and helped me} that it. also made me glad to find 
that they were Christians, and so well remembered what they 
had been taught; that God never failed to help those who 


put their trust in him, and that He had put it into my heart . 


to do them good ; that I had not much with me here, but 
that if they would send with my party two of their young 
men, with spare horses and packs, as far as Edmonton, 
they should return with a supply of blankets, ammunition, 
and such other things as they wanted, which I would give 
them as a token of friendship and, goodwill. 

‘The Assiniboines were much delighted, and gratefully 
accepted my offer, expressing their thankfulness in broken 
words, a 

‘This plan, I think, promises well. Apart from the duty 

* Through some misapprehension of M‘Kay’s, I was led to underrate the 
extent of Mr. Woolsey’s ministrations among these people. The subject is 
more fully gone into afterwards. 


c 


i) ‘ 
260 OLD BOW FORT CHAP, XVI. 


and pleasure of helping these really poor people, I feel that 
to them we owe our rescue from great privations, if not star-“ 
vation itself ; and though, as it happened, I was able to pay 
for all we got, I am satisfied that had we been destitute there 
would have been no difference in their liberality. The men 
Who accompany us will hunt for us on the way, and their 
spare horses will also be serviceable, so that they may freely 
receive-whatever I send them without feeling themselves re- 
cipients of charity. So small a sum, indeed, will suffice to 
make these few families happy, that the circumstances alone 
make the matter worth noting.’ . 

Pooras they were, these Indians hada farm, on which they 
grew different sorts of vegetables. We got some turnips from 
them, which were pretty good, though not of large size. 

The old preacher happening to say that he had never seen 
a likeness of Queen Victoria, I gave- him a half-crown piece 
that bore Her Majesty’s image, which excited great. admira- 
tion, At the same time I divided a few trinkets among the 
women. eee ‘ 

. We did very little about horses, only arranging to leave 
one of the’ Edmonton animals, which was nearly giving out, 
in exchange fora strong black mare; paying two blankets and 
some other things besides, and engaging to send the owner a 
third blanket (which he particularly asked might be a green ~ 
one) on the return of the messengers. Before we left I made a 
trifling purchase from two of the Stonies, buying from one a 
beaded knife-sheath, : and a beaded fire-bag from the other, 
~ which, though worn and. Alirty, and not remarkable in pattern, 
I was glad to have as specimens of their commoner work. 

The snow having | \nearly disappeared, we now struck our 
tents, and made a shot t afternoon march of two or three miles, 
putting ourselyes beyond the reach of the troublesome Indian 


> “ 


CHAP. XVI. TO FORT EDMONTON, 261 


dogs. This enabled us to freeze all our venison by setting it 
out in the open air during the night—Whisky muzzled in 
consequence, to his great disgust. 


n x 
S ASSINIBOINE KNIFE-SHEATH (AND FIRE-BAG 


October 4th.—The two Stonies who were to accompany us 
~ joined us this morning: oné of them, we found, had lately 
been in Dr. Heetor’s employ. I was much struck by the 


262 OLD BOW FORT CHAP, XVI. 


benity of their hands, which seemed to me the smallest and 
shapeliest I had ever beheld on men. Perhaps this special 
handsomeness only belonged to one particular Assiniboine 
band, for no other Indians known to me approached them in 
that respect. 

Another young man also added himself to our party, in- 
tending to ride with us short distance. He was accompanied 
hy his wife, who was certainly the prettiest Indian woman I * 
had yet had a chance of seeing. Instead of being Jean, flat, 
and bony, she was plump and well-proportioned in figure ; her 
features were good, though a little thick ; her expression was 
remarkably pleasant and good-humoured. Below her under 
lip three blue perpendicular lines, about an inch in length, 
. were tattooed with much care and distinctness. 

Before we had gone many miles we observed a large 
party, approaching us on the open plain. We supposed them 
to be Blackfeet, and as they were on bad terms with the 
Stonies, all of us loaded and prepared for a fight. The three 
Indians then rode forward with myself and two others to 
reconnoitre ; and, to my amusement, as soon as we left the 
rest, the pretty young woman pushed briskly on and joined 
us, evidently considering her husband’s side by far the safest 
place when danger threatened. 

We soon made out the enemy.to be nothing wn a com- 
pany of Americans, bound for Frphen’ ’s River. ». Hind, 
whom I had met on the 9th of August, was among the 
number, having fallen in with his present companions at 
Fort Carlton. Mr. Colville — brother of Sheriff Colville 

', of St. Paul, Mr. Dickman, Mr. Reid, and two or three others 
~ whose names I did not learn, made up the whole brigade. 

There were two very fine mules; of immense size, in their 
x\<band, but having rather too few horses, they had already 


¢ 


a 


‘cuar. xv. "~~ TO FORT EDMONTON. 263 


been twelve days on the road from Edmonton, which was 
poor travelling. ' 

‘It was an agreeable and useful meeting on both sides. 
They liberally supplied us with salt, flour, rice, dried apples, 
etc., as far as they could, and we, in return, gave them tobacco, 
fresh meat, a moose-skin, and a shoeing-hammer Besides 
this, Matheson shod several of their horses. We also en- 
gaged one of the Stonies for them as guide over part of the 
mountains, an arrangement they could not have made for 
themselves, having no interpreter, and speaking no -Indian 
‘language. 

‘We dined together, then parted with many kind wishes 
and farewells, and went on our ways rejoicing.’ 

After this we made a good march over a prairie country, 
and camped for the night in a hollow between two hills. On 
the way we saw a number of bounding-deer and four wolves. 
It was. fine winter weather: bright sunshine and hard frost. 
The Pleiades and Aldebaran were now visible after sunset. 

October 5th.—Intense frost. Rose before break of day, and 
travelled through hilly prairies interspersed with a few small 
poplar woods, till we came to Dog Miver, an insignificant 
stream, where we halted-to partake of our breakfast-dinner. 

The Stonies, who had been hunting all the morning, now 
rejoined us, bringing in one black-tailed deer. They had 
killed four others, but left them, as too heavy to carry, 

‘We spoke about sending for this quantity of meat, but 
they laughed at the notion. “What's the use?” they said ; 
“there are plenty more deer on the road,—easy to get, as 
they are not much hunted hereabouts.” 

‘This is an illustration of Indian improvidence: these 
Stonies, on their own hunting-grounds, needlessly destroy 
game, knowing that thé scarceness of game in most of the 


204 . OLD BOW FORT CHAD, XVI. 


surrounding country had often brought people to the verge of 
starvation,—that this very year the Jasper’s House hunters 
_ had ‘been obliged to go elsewhere in search of sustenance, 
‘AVith the Imffalo it is the same—kill, kill, kill. AN the 
“year round the Indians are hunting and slaughtering them, 
and in the winter they drive them into “pounds” by hundreds 
at a time, and murdé every beast in the enclosures, male and 
female, young or old, usable or useless. Such waste will 
soon bring its bitter punishment.’ 4 

October 6th.—Made a very Jong march over an undulating 
country, and halted for dinner a good deal later than usual, 
owing to the difficulty of finding wood and water. The same 
cause obliged us to travel on for an hour after dark ; the moon, 
however, gave some little light, though obseured by clouds. 

Shot two young .musk-rats at the edge of the quiet pool 
beside which we were camping, and had them cooked as 
part of supper. I thought them rather good, ‘like rabbits, 
with a duck flavonr’ They are not real rats, but more of the 
beaver tribe, living entirely on vegetable food.* Shot also 
several prairie-fowl in course of the day. 

October Tth,—~The country became more hilly as we 
approached Red Deer River. Again we had to march for 
an hour in the dark, ¢ camping forethe night near a swampy 
-piece of water about a mile off the regular track. 

A flock of wild swans rose from a lake as we passed by, 
soared upwards, and streamed away into the distance in a. 
long and waving line. I watched the beautiful creatures till 
they were so far off as to seem like a white ribbon floating 
across the deep indigo-blue of the evening sky. 


* Fiber Zibethiens. The Ausquash (Musk-beaver, Muskrat). Mfusquesh 

» also Peesguar-tepeyow (the anima? thut- sits on the tee in w round form) 
—~Cree Didians, “Length of head and body, 14 inches; of tail, 84 ihehes.” 
RievARDson,—HMewn, Bord, vol. i. p. 135, 


CHAP. XV -TO FORT EDMONTON, 265 


October 8th.— Another change in the weather; yesterday 
it was very warm with a hot sun, to-day the wind blew from 
the north, and it was bitterly cold. There were plenty of all 
varieties of wild-fowl in the lakes and pools. Short stalked 
and shot 2 swan this morning before breakfast, and a goose 
and a duck were brought in by the hunters at the same time. 
We also saw a number of rabbits—as they are called, though 
more resembling the Scotch mountain hare. They were but 
poor eating, like a particularly tasteless rabbit of the common 
kind * 

After leaving camp, a fewimiles brought us to Red Deer 
River; we had a considerable ‘march, however, along its 
course before reaching the crossing-place at the bend. At 
that point the stream was nearly 100 yards wide, being 
spread over gravelly shallows, but elsewhere ib averaged 
only half that width, in its then low and empty condition. 


Shooting at some ducks near the river, I started a black | 


bear, to which M‘Kay and I gave ‘chase, and ran him pretty 
hard. Old Cendré went well, but the bear doubled so craftily 
in the brushwood, that we could never get near lim; and 
at length he escaped us altogether. 

Camped at BlindRiver, eight miles from the Ited Deer 
River ford. 

Sunday, October 9th.—Slight snow-storm at night ; very 
cold north-west wind. Short made another successful stalk, 
and brought in two fine young swans. - : 

‘The dogs caught a curious animal, like & large dormouse. 
[Beyond the facts that it was about the size of a small common 

*Lepus Americanus The American Hare. Rabbii—Nuropean Resi- 
dents at Hudson’s Bay. Le Lapin—French Canadians. [¥apoos — Cree 
Indians, ‘In the fur-countries this hare becomes white in the winter. . 
Length of head and body, 19 inehes.”  Ricianpsox,—Foun. Bor.-Am., vol. 
ip. 27. ; 


4? 


266 OLD BOW FORT CHAT, XVI. 


yat, or of a very large thick-set mouse, and had conspicuous 
pouches on the sides of its head, [ do not distinctly remem- 
ber the appearance of this animal ; but my impression is that 
its colour was a brownish grey, and its tail hairy, and of no 
great length. J took its skin as a specimen, but unfortunately 
lost it in course of the journey. 

From Sir John Richardson’s work I gather the following 
partieulars regarding the class of animal to which it might 
no doubt be assigned. There are two genera of Sand-rats,— 
belonging to one or other of which are at least. six or seven 
distinct species—the one classified by some naturalists as 
Geomys, the other as Diplostoma :—“ The sand-rats belonging 
to the former having cheek-pouches, which are filled from 
within the mouth, and the-gauffr es or camas-rats of the latter 
genus having their cheek~pouches exterior to the mouth, and 
entirely: unconnected with its cavity.” Both these genera are 
of burrowing habits, but while the rat of the geomys tribe 
appears to use its pouches only as a receptacle for the acorns, 
nuts, roots, plants, etc. that form its food, with the diplo- 
stoma rat “these ponches serve the purpose of bags for carry- 
ing the earth out of their holes. They are filled with the 
foreclaws, and emptied at the mouth of the hole by a power 
which the animal possesses of ejecting the pouches from each 
‘cheek, in the manner that a cap or stocking is turned.”— 
Faun. Bor.-Am., vol, i. pp. 197-209,] 

‘Bears feed almost entirely on roots and mice, and 
besides eating the latter, they dig up and devour. the 
hoards of seed which the poor little creatures’collect for 
their winter nse. Strange, such a huge beast as a grisly 
bear feeding on a mouse! A moose is more what one would 
expect,’ 

October 10th.—Crossed Battle River before dinner, and 


CHAP. XVI. TO FORT EDMONTON, : 267 


camped in the middle of a large plain. Ducks and prairie- 
fowl in great numbers} 

The moon appeared to-night with a luminous Ting “dround 
her, enclosing also the greater part of the eastern sky ; it was 
of a clear light, and showed no prismatic colouring. . 

October 11th.—Mareched before sunrise. The morning, as 
usual, very frosty and cold ; succeeded by a cool, cloudy day. 
Before dinner we ,arrived at the point where the Blackfoot 
track to Edmonton ‘strikes into the road we were travelling. 
Near this place Brun Farouche gave out; he had been ill for 
some time, and had latterly been spared from ‘carrying his 
load; he now became too weak to follow us any more, 80 we 
had to leave him to his fate. 

- On coming to Pike Creek we found thatthe beavers 
had dammed it up below the track, making the \yater so 
deep as to oblige us to raise all the baggage in thé carts, 
by supporting it on poles laid across. While, this ay fange- 
ment was in progress, I went to look at the dayts, and 
near the uppermost observed several trees of eight inches 
diameter lying prostrate, cut down by the knife-like teeth of 
the beavers; other good-sized trees were approaching their 
fall, being gashed with large nicks almost to the centre. 

Having passed Pike Creek, we had a disagreeable journey 
over some twelve miles of recently burnt country, and camped 
at length in a wilderness of brush, after an ‘unusually Jong 
march—of not less than thirty-five miles. As we pitched the 
tents, a little foal, left behind by some former - travellers, 
emerged from the thicket, and came trotting up to our horses, 
with whom he joined company, delighted to find himself 
with friends of his own race. ‘ 

‘Tt was a beautiful sight to watch the full orb of the sun 
sinking in the west amidst clouds of black, purple, orange, 


a 


E 


268 OLD BOW FORT . CHAR, XVI. 
4 ; 

and gold, while the full orb of the moon rose in the opposite 

heavens amidst clouds of purple, lilac, pink, and amber,—the 

two great cloud-masses exactly balanced in size, and corre- 

spoudent in colour, though the former was reflected by the 

latter in feebler and softer hues,’ - 

A number of ducks and prairie-fowl were shot to-day, 
which, with the remains of the Americans’ rice, served for our 
supper: we were then left without a vestige of provisions, 
except a handful of flour and 3lbs. of mouldy pemmican. 

October 12th.—‘ Some of the men started very early and 
went forward to shoot game, and;as we proceeded on our 
march, we were constantly coming upon the ducks and rabbits 
they had killed and left hanging on conspicuous branches for 
our benefit, I could not help thinking of the commonplace 
phrase—You see your dinner: and this well-seen dinner was 
well eaten, to the very last atom, at White Mud River, where 
we halted to rest, after about four hours’ travelling. 

‘As we were now near Edmonton we all made ourselves 
as clean and smart as we could, and, these preparations 
finished, two hours more brought us to the Fort, where flying 
colours and cannon salutes gave us the first part of the 
cordial weleome that greeted our return. 

‘Mr. Christie, who is now in charge, received me with 
the utmost kindness and hospitality. I had also the pleasure 
of meeting again the Rev: M. Le Frain from St. Ann, and 
Mr. Macaulay from Fort Pitt- Mr. Brazeau has gone to 
Rocky Mountain Honse, and Mr Woolsey is engaged in a 
maisslonary tour. 

‘There is a wonderful improvement in the Fort. Order 
and cleanliness everywhere prevail. . . . It is delightful 
to be again enjoying some of the comforts of civilisation,—-such 
as wine, well-made coffee, vegetables, cream-tarts, and other 
good things too many to mention. , 


vr 


CHAP. X¥E. "TO FORT EDMONTON. 269 


‘Some of Captain Palliser’s men have just returned, and 
report his safe arrival at Fort Colville’ They bring the 
worst account of Fraser's River,—neither gold nor food to be got. 

‘No very late news from Europe: the latest speak of a 
reat battle being imminent, between the Austrians and the 
united French and Sardinian armies. 

‘Poor Rowland has died. Swimming the river probably 
killed him, the cold being too much for him in his reduced 
condition.’ . 

October 13th—This morning I settled with Munroe and 
Antoine Blandoine, giving each a small remembrance in token 
of goodwill. To the worthy old hunter, however, I was glad 
to make a further present as a mark of more particular regard,, 
and we parted with very real signs of regret on his part,— 
which I entirely reciprocated, for a more honest, excellent 
man it would be impossible td meet with anywhere. 

I then had all the horses brought together, and after a 


“careful inspection with M‘Kay, decided to leave eleven ; among 


which I-regretted having to include the fine chestnut bought 
from the -Stobies at Bow River, as an internal illness had 
suddenly seized him about three days before, and reduced 
him to mere skimand bone. It was arranged that Mr. Christie 
should take over these horses for the Company,’ and enter 
them to my eredit as a balance against those supplied tome | 
on different occasions, rating the whole of them at a certain’ 
average value. My account, therefore, now stood as below :— 


Horses reeeived from the Iorses given or returned to 
{ Company. the Company. 
At Carlton .~ . 3 At St. Ann 1 
At Edmonton . 8 At Jasper’s House . 1 
At Edmonton . . 11 
\ — - — 
" Potal . 11 Total 13, 


Showing a balance of two in my favour 


b 


270 OLD BOW FORT car. xvr. 


« 


I had now only nine horses, besides the six left at Carlton - 
in July, as the following statement will explain — 


Horses transferred. Horses kept. 
Wawhbee. Cendré. ‘ 
, Bleu. Jasper. 
Revolver. . Pitt Bichon. 
Sharp.- M‘Gillis (Blond).* 
Dunean 2d. Rémont. : 
« Short-tail. Wawpooss 2d. a 
Chocolat. Mission Cendré. 
Brun. Skewbald. * 
Black. . Black mare, 
Moutonne. - 
Chestnut. & 
Total 11 Total 9 
Horses lost. Horses at Carlton. * 
Whiteface. . strayed, Aug. 23d, Morgan. 
Bay‘. .-.. . died, Sept. 13th. Vermont. 
Prince . . . gave out, Sept. 21st. Paul, . 
Jarlton Bichon gave out, Sept. 25th Anthony. 
Brun Farouche gave out, Oct. 11th. Mousey. 
Rowland . . died, Oct. 12th. Deserter. 
: . Total 6 Total 6 


October 14th.—‘ Took leave of the Assiniboines this morn- 
ing, giving them their present, with the following letter to 


mom oO 


their people ~— 


a 


‘My Friends—I send you some things as I promised. 
There are... blankets. The greén one is for the man from 
whom I got the black mare, the others aré to be given to the 
two old men to be divided among your families, I also send 
... bullets, with powder; ... knives, a packet of tobacco, and... 
kettles, to be distributed in the same way. The three caps 
are for the two old men and the old man who preaches. . 


. 


ae 


CHAP, XVI. TO FORT EDMONTON. ; 97] 


‘I have given. three blankets, some clothes, a shirt, . 
bullets, and some - tobacco" to the three men who came here,- — 
for themselves. Pale ' . 

‘I hope you wilhtake care nob. to waste the ammunition. 

% T trust God mayg grant you health and prosperity : and I 
shall ‘always remain your friend, SOUTHESK.’. 

/ ’ , 

[In a letter from the Rev. Mr. Settee (with whom, as it 
will be seen, I afterwards became acquainted at Fort Pelly), 
dated January 11th, 1871, I received the sad news that 
small-pox had carried off- the whole camp of these poor 
Mountain Stonies. The disease first appeared in the Saskat- 
chewan district about the month of Tuy 1870, and made 
terrible ravages among the Indian tribes.] - 

That afternoon I sent off all the horses to Carlton, in 
charge of Kline and Lagrace. My plan, as finally arranged, 
was to travel there by river inone of the Company’s large boats, 
which, under ordinary circumstances, is by far the quickest 
and easiest way. I hoped to hire six more horses at that fort, 
which, with those left in summer, would guable me to 
reach Fort Pelly, where it was considered that dog-trains 
were most likely to be found. If all went well, I expected to 
arrive at Carlton about-the end of that month, and at F ort 
Garry towards the beginning of December... 

Sunday October 16th.—[A ridiculoug thing happened this 
morning. I was in the act of washing myself i in my india- 
rubber bath, when, suddenly the door flew open, and two 
- splendidly dressed Indians walked §nto the room as if the 
whole place belonged to them, but on seeing me they 
stopped, and stared with all their might. We stared at one 

/ sve for a moment, then a radiant smile came over their 


acésand there was a general laugh, after which I continued 


ot , 
272 OLD BOW FORT TO FORT EDMONTON. * cap. xvi. 


,my sponging, to their evident wolder and amazement, What” 
they thought of the ceremony I never happened to find out.] 
“4. These men were envoys from the Blackfeet, sent as fore- 
er . tunners, according to the usual custom, to announce the near. 
— approach of the whole tribe, who were coming on the follaw- 
ing Tuesday, under the leadership of the chiefs Nahtooss and 
Bull-head, to pay their annual autumn visit to the Fort. 
hy Every one agreed in speaking of these arrivals as very 
aa picturesque and interesting displays, and much did I regret 
being unable to stay for the occasion, but the lateness of the - 
season prevented me. Even a day was precious just now, 
there being barely time to reach Fort Carlton before the 
period at which the river generally freezes up ; and the state 
of the weather increased our anxiety to set off, for the cold 
was severer than usual at this date, and a heavy fall of snow - 
had occurred on Friday night, — : 


THE PROTA 
i », . ; , _ VIR eee MOS 
INSTITUTE, 


CHAPTER XVII. 


tee 
nes ~ 


FORT EDMONTON TO FORT PITT. 


“ 


Ocropmr 17th.—All our: arrangements being completed, we 
embarked in Mr. Christie’s own new and roomy boat, “The 
Golden Era,” which he had obligingly lent us for the voyage, 
and by noon were fairly on our way down the broad cur- 
rent of the Saskatchewan River. I felt depressed, almost 
sorrowful, on Jeaving Edmonton, where I had been made 
more than comfortable, through the constant attentions and 
hospitalities of my kind entertainers, and but little could be 
gathered from the aspect of nature to chase away gloom and 
raise one’s spirits to cheerfulness. Bright as shone the sun the 
cold was most cruelly severe, and there was something very 
melancholy, although not wanting in poetic: ‘charg, in the 
monotonous, incessant flight of legions of ducks, which swiftly 
and steadily winged their way down the river, pursuing their - 
acbustomed’ easterly course in search of more warm and genial 
habitations. But travellers view things practically ; so those 
who were not rawing. brought out their guns, and immense 
blazing . at the-dueke+ went on; seven only, however, were 
actuallyzgédured; “for the birds flew high and wild, and those 
that we merely wounded could seldom be recovered. 

At nightfall we drew in to the shore, and kindled our 
fire on a dry, sandy beach: then, after supper, we made a 
very pleasant companionable party, all sitting together round 


the blazing logs, as was our custom before the arrival of the 
T 


aT 4 FORT EDMONTON ~- . CHAP. XVII. 


Saskatchewan men. My’ party” now consisted of MKay, 
MBeath, Matheson, Short; Toma and Duncan, — who- 
formed an excellent crew for the Golden, Era. Whisky, 
alas! had deserted us, preferring ignoble ease at the Fort to 
our good society: sooi~ayould he regret his short-sighted 
selfishness, when compelled tothe old toilsome sleigh-work 
“under the tormentor’s lash. — ; 

October 18th.— Heavy snowstorn, at night. Sleet and 
snow, with high north-west wind, continued till late in the 
afternoon. It was awfully cold. Took an dar for a couple 

~ of hours to warni myself; pretty hard work tugging at’ those 
eizhteen-foot poles called oars. River beginning to freeze.’ 
Octoler, 19th.—! Cdld intense: ground covered. with 
snow. The intensity of the cold nearly destroys one’s 
vitality ; several times I felt as if going to faint. ... The 
river is\-very nearly frozen over: unless a change come + 
to-night we shall be ice-bound, and have to walk a hundred 
miles or more to Fort -Pitt, where the horses ought to be.’ 
October 20th.— Snow in the night, frost in the day. | 
> .  Mtiver blocked with great masses of i¢e: boat closed in.’ 
October 2.1st—‘ Seeing no prospect of escape, we sent off \ 
Matheson and Short to bring the horses from Fort Pitt. 
Worked hard all morning with the men clearing away the 
snow from the camp, and making: everything tidy, as we 
shall have to Stay-here some time. 
‘In the afternoon the men cléared-out_the Golden Eva, 
and freed it of snow: Tamused myself cutting logs for the-fire—_ 
. Wn aurora borealis in the region of Ursa Major’ 
. October 22d—! Intensely cold night; blankets sprinkled 
* with hoar-frost, notwithstanding the shelter of the tent; 
could not put my head out from under the buffalo robe with- 
out positive pain.’ . 


no vs « 

. ot. cMar. xyIh. TO FORT PITT. Se “ 975 

- ‘We shall probably have to stay more than a week 

; “ip this wretched place. Nevertheless, I should be a foul 
, to grumble, though longing to make progress on my home-_ 
” ward way, 80 many proofs have I had that Providence orders 
all for the best. For example, at Edmonton we learned that 
«the Blackfeet have become very hostile, so that Captain 
Palliser with difficulty escaped from them, owing his safety 
only to the efforts of Munroe, ‘his interpreter (brother to my 
Munroe), who dissuaded them from an intended attack. 
Having cot an idéa.that- Government is going ‘to taketheig 
land from ‘them, and that the Expedition was sent to survey 
it with that'view, they have vowed to murder any- “white men 
who enter their territories ; thus, if the failure of provisions ; 
had not obliged me to give up my plan of crossing the plains 
from Bow Fort to Carlton, we should have incurred great 
danger, being certain to have met’ with these: treacherous 
savages. The horses would have been taken, and probably 

_ our rifles and other property: some of my people even think--~ 
we should have been murdered, but that I doubt, though an 

* Indian war-party is not over serupulous~* : 

‘Walked.a.few miles with my rifle, and saw tracks of 

small deer. The snow is about {? nine] inches deep’ 

* Sunday, October 23d—‘ Passed an unéomfortable night, 
feverish, and suffering from.a bad cold in the head and throat. 
Weather continues frosty‘ and intensely cold: river quite 

- frozen over. Much depressed at the thought of staying 
another week in this. miserable. place, and, after that, two 
months’ hard travelling to Fort Garry in snow and wretched- 
ness. This “detention ‘completely upsets all plans. My ° 
travels hitherto have often been wearisome enough, but 
formerly I had hope and novelty ‘for consolers. Now, all * 
chance of sport-is at an end’— .. . . - 


) : ~ os 


276 FORT EDMONTON CHAP. Bon. 


: . “0 ‘ 
October 24th— Last night wag cloudy, the wind changed 


to south, and there was very little frost. I am better to-day, 
and so is M‘Kay, who is suffering from an attaals 0 of the same 
kind. It seems to bt the Edmonton iiness, MicliMor some 
weeks has been laying up so many people there,—severe 
affection of the stomach, feverishness and cough,—rather an 
influenza than a cold. He remarked, justly I think, that 
such an illness sooner leaves a man living in the open air 
than one shut up in a house. 

‘One of the great luxuries in this change of weather is the 
delivers om having one’s bedding frozen wherever the 
breath touches it ; it~is_unpleasant to pass the night with a 
collar of ice round one’s neck, and a sprinkling of icicles on 
one’s pillow, Blankets are poor protectors from cold com- 
pared to bulfalo robes, one robe being more than equal to 
three good blankets; but I doubt if any quantity of cover- 


ings could keep a chilly person warm in these bitter nights. . 


Be that as it may, I find-that even disturbed sleep in the 


open air (or under a tent, which is much the same) refreshes. 


more than the most dreamless .slumbers on sétt Reds. in 
heated rooms. [That is, in the long run it is so, though 
not always, nor even generally, on any single occasion. | 

‘MKay and SM‘Beath went out shooting, but sav 
nothing, and found the country, at any distance fromthe 
river, so swampy as to be almost impassable, . 


——‘ Finished’ a second reading of Buler’s My Novel, a“ 


work in regard to which the author-may well shaw his pride, 
by giving it such a title, implying his readiness to rest his 
_ fame as a novelist upon it;—but what work does not~lay 
itself open to criticism ? 


‘I would ask——Whence is Randal Leslie supposed to de- 
tive his powerful, though evil, genius? His father is a 


CHAP, XVI, TO. FORT PITT. > TT 
a , my 2 
hopeless idiot, whose own father appears to have been of 
the samé sort, and whose mother was a Hazeldean,.which is 
saying enough. Randal’s mother is a restless fool, and 
neither the Montfydgets nor the Daudles could ‘have trans-, 
mitted any valuable qualities through her to her progeny. 
In like manner, Nora Avenel seems unaccountable in such a 
family as that she springs from, and even if we imagine her 
genius to have developed itself from some germs in the 
' parents’ minds, we are at a loss to find her brother and 
sister, Richard and Jane, so absolutely Ther opposites in 
character. I am convinced -that in real life there is always 
a connecting chain, slender though it be, bringing the minds 
of near relations into some sort of inner unison, however 
great their external differences may seem. 

‘Another remark—Does not the author over-push the 
notion of partially blemishing some of his higher characters 
in order that they may not seem unnaturally perfect? Par- 
son Dale’s evil tempers at whist (unacknowledged and 
unrepented of), however common and’ trivial the fault, are 
so forcibly depicted .as to injure the effect of his sibsequent 
holy exhortations. Riccabocea’s grotesqueness is so dwelt 
on, that we vainly try to think of him as an Italian patrician 
of the sublimest type, when his honours are finally restored. 
Harley's schemes of vengeance are pushed so far as per- 
manently to affect our belief in his natural generosity, and 
his devices become so crafty that his former frankness is 
made to look ag if it had been mere indolence. Leonard 
is at first such an awkward milksop that nothing can 
ever raise him in our respect,—let him be poet, orator, or 
lover, we cannot separate him from our memories of a 
loutish cub well thrashed by Randal Leslie. ‘Hazeldean is 
80 stupid, so pompous, so tyrannical, that his good-heart- 


278 FORT EDMONTON CHAP. XVI. 


eduess and active benevolence melt into the clouds, and 
“Prize Ox,” the name he so much resented, seems his most 
appropriate designation—if one suppose the beast more stir- 
ring ‘and irascible than fat cattle generally are. 

‘Violante stands out magnificently on the canvas: there 
is nothing to interfere with our delight in her noble quali- 
ties. What author but Bulwer is able to raise up such an 
image of the female character of grandest type, perfect in 
beauty, in refinement, in genius, in love? And-Atdley 
Egerton, who but a master;of the art could have created 
him? Why, Oh why, after the death of his second wife—_ 
a wife married for money-—did he retire to the country for a 
few weeks, and come back to town “with a new wrinkle on 
his brow”? Such an improbable, incongruous sentiment- 
alism goes far to make him ridiculous altogether. 

‘Shakespeare often indicates faults in his higher charac- 
ters, when inisfortunes have to overtake them, lest Heaven 
might otherwise be thought too severe towards a worthy 
and dutiful child; he also generally indicates vittnes in his 
baser characters, that they may be men, not monsters; but 
he does not present these paradoxes so forcibly as to distract 
attention from the leading idea. For example: on the one 
hand, Desdemona’s want of filial.duty; Ophielia’s weakness 
and readiness to act as a spy on her lover; Cordelia’s pride; 
Juliet’s unbounded passion ;—on the other hand, Falstaft’s 
jovial good nature ; Lady Macbeth’s wifely and motherly feel- 
ings, and her deep remorse ; [even Shylock can cherish’ a past 
love, and bear a warm heart for those of his own nation; 
even Caliban has a dash of goodness in him, some rough 
poetic fancy, some power of veneration and attachment]. 

[Sir Walter Scott errs constantly in sinking his heroes 
too low to be quite re-elevated to their proper height. Cer- 


OMAP. XVIL : TO FORT PITT. 979 


: dain sorts of meanness or baseness are so opposite to the . 
character of a gentleman, not to say hero, that to attribute 
them to any personage who is meant to be an object of 
respect or esteem, or even to make the unjust imputation 
of them rest on him too heavily and long, robs him beyond 
retrieval of our sympathy, and wounds our imagination in 
the tenderest part. — 

Nothing can redeem Waverley from the contempt he has 
so fully: merited as a pitiful turncoat; Kenneth, in 7hé 
Talisman, can. never lose some traces of the low defaulter’s 
stigma for quitting the standard he was placed to guard; 
Glenvarloch, in The Fortunes of Nigel, is lowered for ever by 
being disgraced at court as a petty, sparrow-hawking gam- 
bler; Mordaunt, in The Pirate, is crushed to the earth by 
Cleveland’s superior force and his own wretched love Yacil- 
lations ;—in short, Sir Walter’s heroes are most often put 
into such foul shades, and kept there so long, that they never 
recover their brightness,—their souls smell of the dungeon 
to the last.] 

October 25th—* The wind is high and in a new quarter, 
the sun shines once more. The mildness of the westerly wind 
has affected the weather ; the snow is melting, the ice, though 
more than half-a-foot thick, ‘Degins to break, and the rising 
water piles it up in heaps and runs swiftly-in narrow chan- 
nels. <A, few birds, who have found out our feeding times 
and make them their own, are singing in a subdued way, 
and a spring feeling pervades all nature. 

October 26th——‘ The night has been rather cold. The 
sun shines as it did yesterday, but there is frost in the air. 
Took my rifle and walked a few miles up the river, but saw 
no game. We have been here a week to-day; the tedious-. 


ness is awful.’ 


280 FORT EDMONTON OMAP. XVI. 


‘T have been reading the second and third parts of “ Henry 
VI” Would that one could kiow how much truth there is 
in Shakespeare’s version of history! A great poet dealing 
with historical themes assumes‘a mighty responsibility, for 
generations untold will be led, by his genius to accept his 
views of the past. Where one man reads history a hundred 
read poetry, and not only believe in the poet’s accuracy but 
hate those who. bring facts tending to cast doubt on it. _ 

‘Did great men in the middle ages, or in Shakespeare's 
own day, really curse.and revile one another as he represents, 
or were they content to “use daggers” without “ speaking ” 
them, as folk do now? Theatres have always required their 
poets as well as their artists to scene-paint audaciously, for 
the sake of dull or distant eyes. 

‘The silent, self-contained man who bears down the world 
by sheer force of will displayed in deeds not words, who, 
passionless as a statue, makes the passions of others his min- 
istering sprites, seems to be of modern creation in fiction. 
The writers of old were too objective to trouble themselves 
with a sort of character that did so much with so little 
show, effects seeming to them more valuable than causes. 
Modern French romancists ‘particularly delight in these 
iunpassible heroes. They often represent Englishmen in | 
. Such guise... I doubt if, they are right ;~for though, ‘as com- 
pared with foreigners, the Briton works silently and power- 
fully, yet the very characteristic of his strength is its free- 
dom from that self-consciousness which your romantic in- 
scrutable being of indomitable will possesses in the utter- 
most degree. The English like work that is done under 
right impulses from without, and neither much spoken of 
nor thought over preViously to _its execution; the French 
more esteem work meditated and announced beforehand, 


CHAP, xvit. . TO FORT PITT. 98] 


which the worker can therefore claim as his own creation, 
instead of disclaiming all merit in, it, as being a mere gift of 
circumstance or fortune.’ 

October 27th.—‘ Frost again at night, followed by a mild 
day with bright sun ; the ice melting and cracking. M‘Kay 
walked eight miles down the river, and reports that about 
three miles from this, at a bend between steep banks, the 
ice is packed into a dam, below which the stream is open 
for as far as he could see. It is provoking to think that 
had we gone on half-an-hour longer at the time we were ' 
stopped, our imprisonment would have been ended some days 
ago. ,There is no way either to break the dam or take the 
boat to the clear water below it. . . MKay made a 
draught-board, and a set of men for the game.’ 

October 28th and 29th——Mild, sunny spring-like days. 
The ice cracking veny much up-stream. 

Sunday, October "30th.—! Another Sunday at this dreary 
place. We had hoped to be set free ere this. Never have 
I passed such a wearisome time. ach day is like the other. 
I rise soon after the sun, then breakfast on cold ham, then 
read or think till mid-day, then dine on beef either fresh or 
dried, then read or think till dusk (about half-past four 
clock, I suppose; ny watch is not going) ; then the lovely 
star Capella appears, and I look at it and think of many 
things ; then Cassiopeia begins to shine, and soon all the 
stars are in their places, each reminding mie of some dear 
friend with whom I associate it. Then comes supper— 
cold ham and tea; then a long time of restless thinking, 
till Aldebaran and the Pleiades have passed the large tent 
[opposite mine], and the Pointers lean from east to west, 
and Arcturus is below the horizon; and then to bed, “to 
sleep, perchance to dream,” perchance to toss wearily from 
side to side for many a tedious hour.’ 


“. 


FORT EDMONTON omar. xvn. 


Ww 
Co 
to 


Octvber 31st-—' Took my rifle, and walked some five or 


six milés. down the river. Found everything as M‘Kay . 


had reported on Thursday—ice closing the stream for about 
three miles below our camp, and then a clear channel as far 
as the eye can reach. Saw no game and no fresh tracks, 
and got very tired walking in the deep snow.’ 
November 1st.-~‘ Deliverance at last,— thank . God 
_ Almost in despair; and too weary to read, or do anything, I 
_lay down about mid-day and tried to sleep; but my drowsi- 
ness was quickly dispelled by the welcome sound of a shot, 
soon followed by another, and, in a few minutes, Matheson, 
Kline, Macdonald (a Company’s man), and Komenakoos) a 
famous Indian hunter), came riding in, bringing with them 
sixteen horses from Fort Pitt. - 

‘Matheson and Short had had a severe journey on foot, 
through snow knee-deep for most of the way. The frozen 
crust had cut nearly all the skin off Short’s legs below the 
jmees, causing him great suffering. They did not reach 
Fort Pitt till the sixth day, and during the last three days 
had no food’ [Yet (as it was afterwards told me) these 
gallant fellows made no complaints of hunger on arriving at 
the Fort, but talked in the most cheerful manner about other 
things, until asked by Mr. Chastellain if they would-have 
something to, eat. They kept themselves warm at night, by 

partly moving their fire after it had burned an hour or two, 
and lying down in the ashes as soon as the place was suffi- 
ciently covled.} 

‘It seems that we are not more than a day’s march from 
Edmonton, being twenty miles above the in-fall of White 
Mud Creek, a considerable stream that joins the 3 river on 
this, its northern, side. 

‘Truly if hope-deferred makes the heart sick, hope satis- 


» 
cq 


* 


arate 
for 


& 
“ ° 


CHAT. XVU. TO FORT PITT. 983 


a 


fied cures the sickness. Before our friends arrived I felt 


actually il, but their coming gave me the best appetite for’ 
dinner I have had for many a weary day.’ , 

November 2¢—~ During the night there was a change 
onthe beautiful weather of the Jast ten days, and an east 
wind brought snow in its stead. We started at 10 AM. in 
the face of a storm, and rode for some hours against snow 
and bitter wind. In the afternoon the snow left off, but the 
cold continued. "We camped a few miles beyond White 
Mud Creek; it was an uncomfortable camp, for shifting 
winds blew the smoke continually into my tent. The river 
is quite closed near this—[the open water seen by M’Kay 
and myself did not extend very far] , 

November 8d.—~‘ Started at daybreak and rode till ten 
o'clock.: Agonisingly cold yesterday and to-day; our beards 
were hung with icicles; we might have sat for portraits of 
the Genius of winter. Rather less cold in the afternoon,~ 
perhaps we felt it less, having fed. Camped near a consi- 
derable piece of water called by the Indians “The Spot-on- 
a-Saddle Lake.” At sunset it began snowing again. 

‘During the height of the cold the thought occurred to 
me—-Why am I enduring this? For pleasure—was the 
ouly reply, and the idea seemed*-so absurd that I laughed 
myself warm. Then as circulation returned, I remembered 
that I was taking a lesson in that mést valuable of human 
studies—the art of Endurance: an art the poor learn per- 
force, and the rich do well to teach themselves~—though 
truly they have their own trials too, in a, different fashion. 

I often think of the story of an officer who was so 
anxious to harden himself before a campaign against the 


Caffres, that he used to leave his coimfort ble quarters, and 
sleep uncovered in the open air during the merst- OK weather 


\ 
| 


NS 
7 


284 FORT EDMONTON CHAP. XVII. 


the end was, that when marching orders came he was too 
rheumatic to-go with his regiment? So, in life, we are apt to 
doctor our souls so much with medicines of our own mixing, 
that when Providence gives us our regular allowance of afflic- 
tion-physic we have not vigour enough to swallow it with 
resignation or benefit by its power, and sink into despondency, 
instead of finding our strength “renewed like the eagle’s.” 
‘Nevertheless, that training of the soul of which bodily 
fasts were the symbol, that rending of hearts of which rend- 
ing of garments was the type, is an unquestionable duty— 
only not too much of it, for any sake !’ ; 
November 4th—‘ Fine day—turned cold in the evening. 
Made a good march, starting before sunrise, and camping 
long after sunset.’ 
 < , November 5th.‘ Intensely cold morning, an east wind 
. arivi ing particles of frozen snow against our faces. Cer- 
tainly I shall “ remember, remember, the 5th of November,” 
for such cold I never felt in my life. It got a little better 
in the afterneon. The sun was shining brightly all day in 
a cloudless sky, but his beams seemed as cold as the i ley 
wind. [We had nothing better than our autumn clothing —~ 
about what one would wear on a codl October day at home— 
for, expecting to get to Fort Carlton ‘before the cold began, 
we had meant to make our winter outfit there. We were 
- all dressed, in fact, in our Rocky Mountains’ garb, except that 
I had a tweed overcoat to cover my leather hunting-shirt.] - 
Crossed’ Moose Creek, at the mouth’ of which one of the 
Company's boats lies icebound ; then Frog River, near which 
we camped. Komenakoos, staying back, saw ten red-deer 
(wapitt) which had passed in front of us [unobserved, owing 
to the nature of the ground]? 


Sunday, November 6th.-~The weather became milder, 


OHAP. XVI. TO FORT PITT. . - 985 


the aky clouded over, and there was a little snow. Passed 
through a very undulating country, abounding in lakes, and 
_ halted for breakfast near “The Two Mountains,” about fifteen 
miles from Fort Pitt. Leaving the rest to come on more 
slowly, I rode forward’ with M'Kay and Macdonald, wishing to 
make my arrival in good timé. A “A short way from the Fort 
we found Mr. Chastellainy the superinténdent, accompanied 
by Mr. Isbister and a pumber of men with dog-sleighs, waiting 
near the track beside a large fire: they: invited us to, halt for 
- our mid-day meal, and we dined together on some excellent 
white-fish, of which they had just procured twelve hundred 
from. a fishery on a neighbouring lake. aye 

After this we proceeded to the Fort, where everything 
was most hospitably done for dye entertainment. 

November 7ih-——We found it necessary to remain for this 
entire day, getting winter clothing, and attending to various 


preparations for the long journey that, yet. lay. before Us. s. 


te ‘There is a great scarcity of provisions ; here; the Indians 
bring in nothing,.and the buffalo are far. off. Unless’ some 
change is made, the Saskatchewan district will become worse 
than useless to the Company, for neither food nor furs come 
this way now, while there are about fifty men employed at 


Edmonton, twenty-five here, and twenty-five at Carlton. .- 


It seems to me that they ought to turn cattle-keepers on 
a great scale. -One- difftulty is, that the Indians, and 
‘ others, are continually setting fire to the plains, consuming 
all the winter stock of hay,—as was the case this year. 
Also, that the buffalo are decreasing, while the Indians are 
hecoming more numerous, and would probably . steal and 
kill the Company’s cattle. They are said, however, to be 
rather afraid of a domestic ox, thinking it what the Scotch 


call “uncanny,” ot, to use their own term, “ medicine,’ — 


of 


~ 


" 286 FORT EDMONTON CHAP. XVII 


that is, something my'sterious, if not devilish. Formerly, 
there were about ninety cattle ‘at this place, but both here 


. _ and at the other Forts they have been Josing great numbers, 


besides being obliged to kill many for food. — 

“The horses at all the Forts are also dying off rapidly, 
from a disease which I suppose to be pleura—-there is the 
greatest scarcity. There is a great scarcity of men too,— 
wages have lately had to be raised. 

‘Farming seems precarious here ;- barley, for instance, 
does not grow above a foot high, and will not ripen ; nothing, 
in fact, thrives but vegetables, At Edmonton, however, 
wheat as well as barley ripens. 

‘Had I the power, I should be inclined to make a . strong 
colony along the Saskatchewan, of Englishmen and Scotch- 


“men, with their wives, and introduce the system of stock- 


feeding, as in Australia. The Company should retain their 
privileges in the district so long as necessary to establish 
such a colony, which ought to be free or nearly so, and- 
perhaps, in recompense, might have their charter renewed | 
and made more stringent as to the other districts’ [This, 
it will be remembered, was written in 1859.] , 

‘Fort Pitt stands in a country which is very frequently 


. the scene of Indian warfare, placed as it is between the 


territories. of the Blackfeet and the Crees, and the Fort 
itself often becomes the centre of hostilities, war-parties 
lying in wait for one another in its immediate neighbour- 
hood. Mr. Chastellain told me of av incident of this kind 
that occurred very’ close to the ‘Fort. ‘A hundred Crees 
surrounded a small pine-clump; in which twenty Blackfoot 
horse-stealers had concealed themselves, They watched 
them the whole night, with fires burning; but just before 
sunrise a short fog sprang up, and all the Blackfeet crept 


CHAP, XVIL, TO FORT PITT. 287 


out of their hiding-place and escaped, except one man who 4 


had been wounded in the previous fight. The Crees founda 


him lying on his back, with an arrow fixed in his bow, ready 
to die ganie. They cut him into bits, and came back with 
his limbs: hanging about their horses as ornaments. Mr. 
Christie recovered. one of the unfortunate fellow’s arms from 
' the dogs who were eating it, and had it decently buried. 

‘ All these Indians kill women and children i in war-time, 
Sparing none; but they never torture their’ prisoners as the 
. Delawares and Troquéi is of old did. I have made. many 
inquiries on this point, and have always heard the same’ 

The Blackfeet, taken as a body, are among the most nume- 
rous and powerful of the nations that live wholly or partly 
in British North America. Their confederacy consists of five. - 


distinct tribes——Blackfeet (proper), Piegans, Blood Indienis,®“ 


aud Fall Indians (or Grosventres, who live on the Migsouri), 
these being of the same race; and the Sircees, a small but very 
brave and very mischievous band, who ate of altogether differ- 
ent race and language, being a par ty of Chipeweyans (a 
people quite distinct from the Chippeways or-Ojibways) who 
joined the confederacy not many years ago.*” [In March 
1870 it was stated in the newspapers that smallpox having 
carried off the most of the Piegans, the American troops had . 
surrounded their village, and massacred every soul in it, 
killing men, women, and children, to the number of 173.7 


* Ag the Indian languages are numerous, so do they greatly vary in their 
effect on the ear. We have the rapid Céotoonay [Kootabie] of the Rocky 
Mountains, and the stately Blackfoot of the plains, the slow embarrassed Fat- 
head of the mountains, the smooth-toned Pierced-tose, the guttural difficult 
Sissee [Sircee] and Chépewydn, the sing-song Assineboigne, the deliberate Cree, 
and the sonorous majestic Chippeway [Ojibway]. Howsz,—2 Grammar of 
the Cree Language: London, 1844, p. 13. . 

++ The same incident is referred to by Captain Butler (The Great Lone 


{ 
. A 


Fa. 


. 


988° FORT EDMONTON CHAP. XVI. 


' Previous to the terrible outbreak’ of smallpox, which carried 


1 


off such multitudes, the Blackfoot confederacy was believed 
to comprise from 12,000 to 14,000 people, all included.] 
‘This powerful confederacy is completely surrounded by 
enemies, with whom there is always some pretext for war- 
fare. On the north, the Crees and Stonies continually force 
ou hostilities, for the sake of stealing the Blackfoot horses, 


. w hich are far better than their own; while, in the south, the 


Blackfeet make war-on the Crows and Flatheads for a 
similar reasou. The Crows, I am told, are the only Indians 
bare enough to attack a camp openly by day. 

» \... ‘The Blackfeet far surpass the Crees in cleanliness, 
and) fineness ofapparel. Mr. Chastellain gave me a beautiful 
specimen of a Blood Indian woman’s dress, made froni 
prepared skins of the mountain-sheep, and richly embroidered 
with blue and white beads. Such dresses are now seldom 
to be met with. An Indian, trading here one day, strippel 
his wife, of this tunic-formed outer garment, and sold it on 
the spot for rum. ; 

‘This 1 is a strange country. <A good horse is often to be 
bought for a gallon of ram; and yet not only strangers like 
myself, but \people ‘of the place, will give £20, £30, even 
£40, for a buffalo-rnner of repute. Here, at Fort Pitt, some 
of the men who own horses have asked me £25 for. only 


~ inoderately good ones, and that sort of price I learn they 


have often obtained from others, 

{It was from, Mr. Chastellain that I heard the following 
anecdote, illustrative of the strength and ferocity of the grisly 
bear: whether he\ himself or another person were, the eye- — 
witness referred to\I do not remember, but I know that he 
vouched for the absolute truth of the story. ‘* 


Land, 1872, p. 360), who a Iso gives much information about the progress and 
ravages of the smallpox epidemic. 
\ 


\ 


yo a 


\ 


CHAP. XVIL TO FORT PITT. 289 


A certain hunter was proceeding to stalk four bulfilo 
bulls, which he had observed quietly feeding at the out- 
skirts of a little wood. While, however, he was yet hardly . 
within range of them, another actor appeared on the scene, 
a grisly of the largest size, who, quitting the covert that had 
concealed him, advanced very deliberately towards the 
nearest of the four buffaloes.. 

The bull was too proud to flee from a single opponent, © 
-—it is not their habit to flee except from man,—he lowered 
his head and prepared to receive the attack: the conflict 
_Was over in a moment; with one sweep of his paw the 
" grisly broke the enormous neck of his antagonist, and laid 
him lifeless on the ground. 

Meanwhile the other bulls had-remained as spectators,” 
taking no part in the conflict, and showing no signs of 
excitement or alarm. 

The grisly having made an end of one of his foes, now 
boldly advanced to the next: the same scene took place as 
before, andthe second bull lay broken-necked a few.yards 
from his defeated companion. | - 

A third time the grisly advanced to the attack: for the 
third time a similar result followed. ; 

’ ‘There was now but one bull left. He was ‘younger 
‘than the others, and his horns were consequently still” 
long, and sharp at the points, instead of being worn and 
blunted through rooting in the earth during the fervours of .. 
many seasons. Though smaller than his companions, he 
met the savage grisly with equal resolution: there was a 
“more protracted grapple; then the bull fell dead with a 
broken neck, like the other vanquished three, but the 
bear, instead of looking about for further conquests, Dow 


dragged himself off, a miserable object, with his bowels all 
. vu . 


290 FORT EDMONTON CHAP. XVI, 


trailing on the ground, protruding through a huge and 
‘ mortal rent inflicted by the horns of the buffalo. “He-had 
but just strength to crawl into the nghiouing bushes, and 
there he very shortly afterwards died. 

I forget whether it was at this Fort, or r elsewhere, that 
TNyas told another curious anecdote, in which the grisly bear 
was Targely concerned. 

Tw dTndians, Crees or Ojibways most likely, were so 
suddenly surprised by a bear, that, after ineffectually dis- 
_ charging their guns, no course presented itself’ but-to take 
~xefuge in the nearest tree, in far too great haste to carry 
up their weapons swith them. * 

The tree, as it happened, was a ‘mere high naked pole, 
with dnly one lateral branch of sufficient size to support the 
weight of a man. Even for that it was hardly sufficient ; 
~so-when the Indian who went up first had seated. himself’ 
on this single perch, the other remained beneath him: in 
the most miserable position, only” preserved from the grip 
of the monster that kept close watch below,—for grislies 
cannot climb timber,—by clinging round the tree-stem with 
all the power of which his arms and kneés were capable. 

Such a state of things, it was plain, could not long 
continue; the poor fellow soon found his strength relaxing, 
and, as he grew “Weaker and weaker, the thoughts of his 
approaching fate, and of his young family left helpless and 
destitute—for these people often love their wives and children 
very tenderly,—-so worked upon his mind that he burst out into | 
tears and lamentations, while the other Indian looked scorn- 
fally down upon him from his place of safety above. 

The fatal moment came, the wretched man’s strength 
gave way, closing his eyes he abandoned himself to his fate, 
as his body went hurtling rapidly through the air. 


CHAP, XVI TO F ORT PITT. 991 


Now, as it chanced, at that very instant the grisly was 
in so exact a line beneath, that our friend, instead of dashing 
upon the hard ground, plunged right uponthe animal's back, 
a catastrophe which so astonished the bear tat away he 
rushed in a panic, as hard as his legs could carry him. 

Finding that the enemy had no intention of returning, 
the second Indian after a time descended, and, resuming 
‘their guns, the two proceeded together to the encampment 
where they both had their home. As they were on the 
way, the unlucky hunter, filled with alarm in anticipating 
the ridicule he would meet with were his-weakness under 
prospect of death proclaimed to the tribe, exerted himself in 
the most munificent offers to his companion, in the hope of 
. purchasing his silence; and he did at length succeed in 
extracting a promise of secrecy, but only by the sacrifice of 
everything he possessed in the world of the slightest luxury 
or value. Stripped of all but the-bare necessaries of life, ~ 
the poor fellow could yet be happy—his self-respect was 
saved. 

But, as might be imagined, the man who could take so 
base an advantage of a friend’s misfortune was not likely to 
prove a trustworthy guardian of the secret he had sworn to 

_ preserve. Not many months afterwards, this worthless 
. Villain, as he came staggering through the camp in one of 
" his accustomed fits of drunkenness, began loudly to proclaim 
the story of his friend’s disgrace, and hold him up to the 
bitterest contempt and ridicule. 

The outraged Indian went straight into his tent and 
“armed himself with a loaded gun, then returning to the 
place where the knave was uttering his scandals, he took 
aim at him in sight of all the people, and shot him through 
his traitorous heart.] 


CHAPTER XVOUL 
FORT PITT TO FORT CARLTON. 


NOVEMBER 8th—~About mid-day we took leaye of the 
warmth aud shelter of Fort Pitt, and resumed our cheerless 
journey. We were now much better equipped for enduring 
the cold, having provided ourselves with a considerable stock 
of winter clothing. © 

My men were all in their new attire:—white flannel 
leggings drawn over their trowsers and gartered below the 
knee’, moccasins of endrmous size, stuffed with wraps of 
blanketing; thick white or blue capots over their leather 
shirts. There were fur caps, too, in great variety: M‘Kay had 
chosen a round one of otter-skin, M‘Beath a muff-shaped bear- 
skin; Kline, Matheson, and Toma wore the entire skins of - 
foxes, coiled round their broad-brimmed felt hats. My own 
cap was of marten, with anink under the ear-pieces—but I 
am anticipating, this was made for me at Carlton a few days 
afterwards. Dunean appeared 3 In a white capt with ¢ a hood 


furnished - w ith Jeathicr mittens, of oF Boul * Simy, fiainel-’ 
lined, fingerless gloves, which we “carried slung. round our, 
necks,*that our hands might be slipped in and sont ag it, * 
cumstances happened to require. For my own benefit Lo 
had invented a special luxury, consisting of a pair ot 
immense buffalo- robe boots, with the hair inside, very wide 
and Jong,. ;So as to draw easily over everything and come’a 


t 


CUAL. XVII. FORT PITT TO FORT CARLTON, 293 


good way above the knee. While new Tf thought them 
masterpieces, for they were exceedingly warm and comfort- 
able, but perpetual scorchings from our huge camp-fires 
burnt and shrivelled them by degrees into much less con- - 
venient proportions. 

The horses all looked vastly the better for their long 
rest; and so did old Lagrace, who, when he arrived at the 
Fort, was rather suffering from the effects of the journey, 
which had come hard on a man of his age. Instead of pack- 
saddles, we were now provided with horse-sleds, as these 

conveyances were generally called. Their construction is of 
the simplest nature, nothing more than three thin elastic 

> boards, turned up in front with a strong curve, and firmly 
fastened together, so- as to form a platform about ten feet 
long, by one and a half’ 'wide. A single horse works each of 
them in shafts, and draws a, considerable load without diffi- 
culty. Carts cannot travel in the snow, for at every turn 
the’ wheels clog up with ice, and keep sliding about instead 
of revolving in the usual manner. 

‘The river being entirely frozen over, we availed ourselves 
of the winter road, which by crossing and recrossing cuts off 
a large bend, and offers the advantage of saving about hatf- 
a-dozen miles. In most places the snow was at least a foot 
in depth, but the day was so fine that we made excellent 
progress all the same, not stopping till we arrived at the 

2ed-deer Hills, where we halted and camped for the night. 

My. Isbister joined us at supper, and stayed with us till 
the following morning. He had trav elled from the Fort in 
a dog-sleigh of his own, ‘drawn by four very handsome dogs, 
——for whom he bad been ‘offered a pair of good horses, but 
- he knew. the ‘Value of his team too well to part with it. 
Some distance on the way he had overtaken an old Indian 


294 FORT PITT CHAP. XVIII, 


woman in great distress and perplexity. She was making a 
journey with two dogs drawing their “ travaux,” * and had 
halted for the night, when to her alarm she found herself 
unable to kindle a fire, through the failure of all her matches. 
Nothing apparently remained for her but to sleep in the 
snow, without fire, and almost without clothing—a pitiable 
situation indeed, as the cold was extreme and a snow-storm 
beginuing to come on. Strange to say, Mr. Isbister had* no 
matches with him, but to make up for the disappointment 
he very kindly lent her his buffilo robe. Indians can 
always light a fire with flint and touchwood, matches, how- 
ever, are apt to puzzle them; probably the old woman-had 
made some ignorant mistake, and thus destroyed the store 
on which her life depended. 
November 9th—‘ We set out in the teeth of a snow- 
storm drifting furiously before a high north wind—the 
cold intense. My beard and moustaches were’ frozen harder 
than ever before’; my left eye had an icicle jhanging from 
the eyelashes: I expected. to be frost-bitten, and kept 
rubbing my nose and ears continually—it was positive 
suffering. It ig melancholy to think that more than .a 
month of this headship lies before us, between this and Fort 
Garry. Then a fortnight more of it to St. Paul — frail 
‘-pature shrinks—-all work and sorrow, small hope of sport, 
nothing new or curious to be seen—-mere labour, labour, labour. 


* Catlin thus describes the dog-vehicle which is designated ‘‘ travail” or 
“train” (v. p. 68, ante), by the half-breeds -—" Every cur of them 
is encumbered with a car or sled (or whatever it may be better called), on 
which he patiently draws his load. . . . Two poles, about fifteen feet 
jong, are placed upon the dog’s shoulder, in thesame manner as the Jodge- 
poles are attached to the horses, leaving the lower ends to drag upon the 
ground behind him ; on which is placed a bundle or wallet which is allotted 
to him to carry.” Catuin,~—Norlh Am. Ind., vol. 1. p. 45. 


CHAP, XVIII. TO FORT CARLTON. 995 


‘Tt was rather less cold after breakfast, but the wind and 
snow lasted all day. Camped early at English River, 
where Wawpooss fell with me on the 1st of August.’ 

November 10th.—‘ Snowing, and very cold in the morn- 
ing, and misty all day; the snow, however, ceased about 
noon. Saw three buffalo bulls near Horse Hill, —where we 
dined,—and afterwards a band of about twenty. I tried an 
approach on foot, while two of the men went round on 
horseback. hey were in so bad a place no one could have 
stalked them; the men had a shot, but killed nothing. 

‘Halted at Turtle River, after a very short march. In 


the wood which sheltered our camp We found a platform 


on which a quantity of buffalo meat had been stored by 


Indians, or half-breed hunters, and from‘this we took enough 
for supper—according to the rule of the courfry, which is 
the same as that of the old Scotch gooseberry-gakden——* Eat 
what ye can, but pouch nane.” ’ 

_ November 11th-—‘ A fine day, clear and sunny t 
afternoon. Dined a few miles beyond White Mud Lake, 
which we crossed on the ice. Little did I think, during the 
pleasant Sunday passed by us on the banks of this lake last 
August, that we should come homewards riding our horses 
upon the surface of those, waters, which I then beheld 
gleaming under the powerful rays of the summer sun, and 
never expected to look upon again. 

” «Uti astonishing how winter transforms an uncultivated 
country. There are no houses and fences to serve as land- 
marks, and divide the snowy waste; all that lovely colouring 
of trees, grass, and water, which in the genial months of the 
year lends charm and variety to the scene, is hidden and 
obliterated under a garment of weary whiteness. The 
plains are mere heaps of snow, dotted with brown spots 
where naked clumps of poplar brush uplift their heads, 


296 FORT PITT CHAY, XVIHL 


and the lakes are only distinguishable by the absence of 
bushes, and by the greater smoothness of their surface. 

‘In the evening we reached Jack-fish Lake, and marched 
on the ice, keeping always close to the shore. This lake is 
bordered by hills on thé northern side, so that even now it 
_ is picturesque; in summer it is very beautiful. 

‘We camped about sundown,—the sun setting in a clear 
sky, and the moon rising full-orbed, out of a purple and 
orange cloud, over the low mountains of the lake. 

‘Yesterday we found a little Indian dog beside a deserted 
camp,-—very nearly starved. > It followed, us, and we fed it 
and treated it kindly. Poor wretch, she can hardly keep 
up, and every now and then howls dolefully.. Pointer is 
half killed by the cold, he whines and trembles all day 
long’ « [We made him a blanket-coat to cover his thin and 
delicate skin, but he constantly twisted it and entangled his 
legs, so we were obliged to take it avy. He got safely, how- 
ever, to the journey’s end, and wae Yet at Carlton or Pelly, 
T forget which, to pass the rest of the winter, before return- 
ing to Mr. M‘Kay at Fort Ellice] 

November 12th—‘ Marched-more than an hour before sun- 
rise ; cold intense ; my men supposed it to be 30° below zero. 
It is sometimes 50° below zero, in this part of the country. 

‘Dined at the lake where we camped .on the 29th of 
July, and crossed it on the ice,—soon after which we saw 
four buffalo bulls. Met a party from Carlton bringing the 
mail, and likewise the “green hands ”-—~as the newly-engaged 
men are called—for the upper Forts. The verdant ones 
consisted of five or six young Scotch lads, who did not look 
half strong enough for the work in store for them. It was 
useful to have their track to go on, as it relieved us from 
the necessity of sending two men forward on snow-shoes to 
make a path for the sledges. 


 gHAP. XVIII. TO FORT CARLTON. 297 


‘The weather was sunny and bright; our rogg- passed 
through a picturesque hilly country. In the é€¢ 
camped by a clump of poplars, about twelve Smiles from 
“The Springs.” There was an aurora during the night. 
For part of the time the light swept in an upward curve 
from Aldebaran to Capella, and thence ran in several hori- 
zontal hands through Ursa Major, all of them ending on a 
line with the level of Arcturus’ 

[I think it was on this day that the setting sun shed wild 
and wonderful hues over a snow-covered range of hills 
- directly in front of us. They seemed 'to ‘be all aglow with 
’ fire ; ‘not in soft roséate or golden tints, but with a super- 
natural, lurid glare of cold combustion, a hellish light, hateful 
though beautiful to behold. One other day, about the same 
time, I was more than commonly struck with the exquisite 
beauty of the contrast, where the glittéring white intensity 
of the snowy, boundless plains, cut sharp against the clear 
azure intensity of the boundless sky, unsullied by the slightest 
speck of cloud. It was the very type of “light without 
sweetness,” — of a pure passionless angel of judgment, to 
whom error and mercy were alike unknown.) 

Sunday, November 13th— Off before sunrise: weather 
clear and @omparatively mild. . . . .- After dinner 
the wind blew hard from the east, and a snow-storm began. 
The cold was very great, as the snow came violently against 
our faces. We rode on till some while after dark; and by the 
time we halted my eyes were nearly frozen up—my mouth 
had been all but closed long--before, beard and moustaches 


in a solid mass of ice. [For part of 


ae 


storm; M Kay, howev er, with the assistance of Short, who : 
seemed almost to work’ by instinct, unfailingly managed to 
preserve the right direction.] At length we arrived at a lake 


wee. 
oa 


298 ~ - FORT PITT — CHAP, XVIII. 


called ‘ fe Lac de l’Ours qui nage,”’—about<five miles from 

where vel ‘hadrhalted on our second night from Carlton,—and | 

there ehedimped. Two or three hours afterwards the snow 

ceased th fall, and a, single streak of aurora, resembling the 
* tail of a comet, appeared in the western sky.’ 

November 14th—‘A little snow in the ‘morning, but 
afterwards it was a fine sunny day——what we called warm, 
though every breath of wind dispelled that illusion. 

‘Camped early near Salt Lake, because there is a scarcity 
of wood farther on ;—a few buffaloes were moving about on 
the other side. . ove 

¢ ‘The country has been very pretty to-day, wooded and 
hilly, with innumerable lakes, of all sizes, wherever there is 
a hollow. Many of them are most, fantastically shaped. 
They stand.at all levels, some near the tops of the hills, 
some half-way down, others—generally much larger-——in the 
valleys below.’ 

November 15th—Reached Fort Carlton early in the 
afternoon. 

November L6th-1 8ih.—-Chiefly occupied in buying and 
exchanging horses, as some of my band were unfit to go 


farther, and those left here in summer were ‘still weak from ” 


an attack of the €pidemic, which had seized them soon after 
they came. Vermont was looking pretty well, but poor 
little Morgan was the mere shadow of his former self. I 
had intended to take them home with me, but this being 
now out of the question, I was glad to place them in good 
hands, by an arrangement with Mr. Hardisty, who wished to 
become their owner.* Six other horses were also to be left 
behind,—the ‘St. Paul .waggoners Paul and Anthony, the 


* In a letter dated November 12th, 1860, Mr. Mactavish wrote as follows : 
—‘ Mr, Hardisty was here (Fort Garry] during most of thé summer, but 
returns to Carlton in autumn, where, I have lately learned, your ponies were 
in capital case.” 


CHAP, XVIII. , TO FORT CARLTON. ‘ *_ 999 


little Pitt-Bichon, Blond alias M‘Gillis, Wawpooss the second, - 
and the M‘Leod River skewbald stallion. 

Among ‘those newly added to my lot was a very pretty 
long-tailed bay pony, named “Ned,” which Mr. Hardisty 
transferred to me in part exchange for Morgan and Vermont. 
Ned-—who was said to be a first-rate buffalo-runnner, and had 
all the appearance of it—had originally belonged to the Black- 
feet, from whom he had been stolen by the Crees. When 

_ brought in by his captors, he was found to be painted over 
with curious “devices and scented with aromatic herbs, 
which showed how much he had been valued by his foritier 
possessor. The Blackfeet are said to be very fond of their 
horses and very careful of them, differing in that respect 
from the Crees.and Assiniboines, who are rough and unmerci- 
ful masters. I was also to receive, as ‘part of another bargain, 

, the fine young bay horse that Napesskes rode back from the 
horse-guard after our visit to that place in July; being now 
fairly broke in, it had become a handy, quiet, and very useful 

. ~animal. \ 

[By Mr. Hardisty’s orders, a great drove of horses had 
been gathered together in an enclosure, for the purpose of 

_ choosing out those to be allotted to me on hire or exchange. 
As each animal was selected, a noose was thrown over his 
head, and he at once yielded himself an unresisting captive. 
One cast, however, unluckily missed its mark, and the noose, 
dropping among the feet of the hurrying crowd of horses, 
fixed and tightened itself round the hind fetlock of a very 
handsome white mare-—unbroke and unhandled, and as wild 
as any prairie buffalo. ‘Her efforts to escape were frantic ; 
though several men went to help with, the line they could 
barely hold her, far less overpower her. 

“ Strong’ measures ndw became necessary, for at any cost 

her foot had to be disentangled; another line was brought, 


300 FORT PITT TO FORT CARLTON. CHAY, XVII 


the noose was cast round her neck, and then all’ handy 
pwlled together till she was choked into insensibility. Never 
‘did I witness such struggles. She writhed and strained 
against the rope, her veins swelling, her eyes starting from 
their sockets; she reared, she pawed the air with a sublime 
fury ;-—but her efforts were vain, the ‘line pressed tighter 
and tighter, drawn yet more closely by her ‘own violence, 
and in a few moments she lay helpless on the ground. 
The nooses were taken off: ere long she recovered, 
and galloped away, apparently none the worse for her 
adventureé.] . - . 

- The weather had again become auch colder than during 
the last few days. No thermometer could be found at the 
Fort, but reference to a register formerly kept, gave 54° below 
zero as the extremest cold of ‘the previous winter season. 
This was the temperature one day in February [1858]. 

November 19th— We left the Fort after dinner, and 
made a short march of three miles, to place ourselves in 
readiness for the journey on the following day. Mr. 
Hardisty rode with me till we camped, and stayed for a few 
hours afterwards: and then we parted, to my very sincere 
regret, for it grieved me to bid farewell to a companion so 
agreeable, and a friend so obliging, as he had constantly 
proved himself during my two visits to Fort Carlton.* 

There were now fifteen horses in our band. We had 
added another sled to the former number, making five in al]— 
by no means too many for the bulk and weight of our bag- 
gage and provision stores. 


* Mr. Hardisty at present (1874) resides at Fort Edmonton, occupying the 
important position of Hudson's Bay Company's Chief“Officer in the Saskat- 
chewan district. 


Pa 


CHAPTER XIX. 


_/ ; FORT CARLTON TO TOUCHWOOD HILLS. 


SUNDAY, November 20th.—‘Marched at 8 aar, and 
crossed the South Saskatchewan between three and four‘hours 
afterwards. It is narrow at this point, the banks perhaps 
250 yards apart, the water not above 130 yards from shore to 
shore. The country between the rivers seems rich ahd well 
wooded, and abounds in lakes. It looks suitable for settlement. 

‘We camped about three miles from the crossing-place.; 

The little Indian dog ate our fresh meat last night,-and as 
it would not’ be driven back ‘to the Fort, the men were 
obliged to kill it. 

‘Had “ berry-pemmican” at supper. [That is to say, 
the ordinary buffalo pemmican, with Saskootoom * berries 
sprinkled through it at the time of making,—which acts © 
as currant jelly does with venison, correcting ‘the greasiness 
of the fat by a slightly acid sweetness. Sometimes wild 
cherries are used. instead of the Meesasskootoom-meena. 
Berry-pemmican is usually the best of its kind, but poor is 
the best. “Take scrapings from the driest outside corner pf 
a very stale piece of cold roast beef, add to it lumps of 
tallowy rancid fat, then garnish all with long human hairs 
(on which, string pieces, like beads, upou a necklace), and 
short hairs of oxen, or dogs, or both,—and you have a fair 
imitation of common pemmican, though I should rather ~ 


suppose it to be less nasty. 
* See footnote, p. 86. 


ai 


\ 

. \ 

302 FORT CARLTON, CHAP. XIX. 
\ 

Pemmican ig most endurable when ‘uncooked. My inen 
used to fry it with grease, sometimes stirring-in flour, and 
making a flabby mess, called “ rubabdo;” which I found 
almost uneatable. Carefully-made pemmican, such as that 
flavoured with the Saskootoom berries, or some that we got 
from the mission at St. Ann, or. the sheep-pemmican given 
us by the Rocky Mountain hunters, is nearly good,—but, 
in two senses, a little of it goes a long way.] 

November 21st——‘ Marched at 7 a.m. aud camped at 4 
P.M. The country continues much the same, but towards 
evening we passed some hills, and crossed a plain which 
was rather bare of wood. Saw four black-tailed Neen at a 
distance, Mild hazy day, heavy snow at sunset, and a 
little during the night,’ . 


November 22d.— The mildest inorning we have had for - 


several weeks. Hazy weather +ill mid-day, after whigh it 
partly cleared up, and oceasional snow showers from \the 
south-east began to fall. 

‘The snow was exceedingly deep and soft. Kline and 
Short made the track with snow-shoes till dinner-time, 
[Had they not gone forward to tread down the surface, the’ 
heavily laden sleds would have sunk too deeply.] Hav- 
ing no guide we got off the proper line, and lost a mile or 
two. ; . a 

‘The horse Napesskes, whom the other day no flogging 
could induce to work in the shafts, drew very well this 
morning, after a short resistance at starting. Some of these 
horses will not yield to any amount of punishment at the 
time, but they remember it, and give in at once on the next 
occasion. , . 

‘It grieves me that the whip has to be kept so constantly 
going. None of my men are cruel—quite the contrary, so 


n 


= 


\ 


CHAP. XIX. TO TOUCHWOOD HILLS. 303 


far as I can judge—but when obstinate or tired horses have 
either to be driven by main force, or left on the road, there 
is really no choice. In riding it isthe same. Many of the 
horses have such an objection to,leave or pass the rest, that 
nothing short of absolute toiling at whip and spur will 
move them forward. Then, if you choose to ride in front, 
farewell to ease; your beast creeps as if his back were 
of one single bone; if you turn,in the saddle or slack your 
reiny or make any sort of movement, he instantly’ stops and 
perhaps begins to graze; and if you urge him on, he neighs 
to his companions till your head aches from the horrible - 
noise. Very different is it if you wish to stop behind; the ‘ 
dull slug “wakens into a fury, and rears and nd pulls ax and fights 
till you allow him to rejoin the-band.— ~~~ —------— 
* "All the guides, I have noticed, have the same plan for — 
overcoming unwillingness. At every step of the horse they 
touch him very lightly with the whip, about every fifty 
steps they strike him a single but much harder blow, and 
perhaps twice in the mile they “conciliate” him, somewhat 
in thé style of the butcher in Hood's “Qde to Rae 
Wilson, Esquire.”* ; 

*“The man had whooped and bel- At least he seized upon the fore- 


~ lowed till dead hoarse, : ~ most wether, — 
The time was. ripe for mild expos- And hugged, and lugged, and tugged. 
“ tulation, him neck and crop, 
And* thus it “stammered from a Just nolens volens through the open 
stander- “by . shop— . 
_‘ Zounds ymygood fellow,—it quite If tails came off he didn’t care a 
~ makes me—why : feather, — 
It really—my dear fellow—do just Then walking to the door, and 
try , ./ smiling grim, - 
Conciliation!’ Se He rubbed his forehead and his % 
Stringing his nerves like flint, sleeve together— 


pr 


The sturdy butcher seized-upon the ‘There! I've conciliated him | 
hint,— 


304 FORT CARLTON CHAP. X3X, 


‘Those who have not known the misery of riding a half- 
wild, half-broke, obstinate, under-bred, grass-fed beast, can 
‘scarcely imagine the difference between such a creature and 
the well-bred, well-fed, well-broke horse one rides at home. 
Even in the latter’s fatigue or laziness there is a certain 
respectability, but these Indian animals are provoking even 
at their best; qwing to their odious sociability, which leads 
them only to care for one another, while they treat their 
rider ag a mere encumbrance, to be jogged about as it 
pleases them, like any other pack, not as the master whose 
will is their proper guide.’ . 

“It was amusing to listen to the men shouting to their 
horses, in a Canadian jargon, calling them the oddest names. 
“Ah! pecheur!” I heard Short cry to an offending one, 
with solemn reprobation in his tones. Crapaud was the 
usual term of abuse,—most frequently with an objectionable 
prefix. - Matheson, who did not speak much French, ended 
his mofe serious lectures with—“ Ah! moa crapaud,’—in 
a sort of “Et tu, Brute” strain. 

November 23d¢d—‘ We could not start till near 11 o’clock, 
as Cendré had strayed. He was found near our yesterday's 
dining-place, having probably ‘lost the other horses when they 
were being driven-in early this morning, and gone back in 
search of them. We then” marched without halting till 
sunset, and camped in a clump of trees, about two miles 
frém an extensive prairie. , 

‘Much colder day,—small hard snow constantly driven 
into our faces by a high south-easterly gale. For the last . 
month we have hardly had a fair wind, actually never when 
snow has been falling. Our fate seems to be that to which 
prophecy dooms a certain ancient family for their ancestor’s 
share in Thomas A’Beckett’s murder— 


ry 
Pe eters, 
Ta ae 


CHAP, XIX. TO TOUCHWOOD HILLS. 305 


ean ; 
ee \ 
“ Rg « The Tracies, yo 


~ Shall always have the wind im their faces,” 


I 


‘The country we passed through to-day is high and 
rather bleak. There is little wood, though plenty of stunted 
brush. The soil seems poor. ae 

‘Put Jasper into .harness for the first time, and made 
him haul a sled. He took to it-kindly ; in fact, he will do 
anything except go fast, or first, 

November 24th—‘ The wind turned to north last night, 
and the stars were visible once more; Orion is now com- 
pletely seen about 8 p.m. We marched at 6.45 this morning, 
and took four hours to cross the plain. A snow-storm 
then burst out, obscuring the whole country, and as none of 
us knew the track we were obliged to halt and camp: where 
we were’ 

November 25th——‘ Four inches of snow fell in course of 
the night. My tent was uncomfortably placed, its back 
being set directly to the wind,—the result of which is, 
that eddies are formed on both sides, bringing with them 
the snow or rain, and driving-in puffs of smoke from the 
fire; while most of the heat is carried away. It is best to 
pitch with one side against the wind; the smoke and heat 
then take their proper course, and by drawing out part of 
the windward door-flap, good shelter is obtained. 

‘There is much: art in building a fire. If you merely 
heap sticks together on the ground, no quantity of fuel gives 
satisfactory results. You must begin by placing two green 
logs at right angles to the intended line of your fire, you then 
lay the sticks and the dry logs across them; this secures a 
strong current of air below, raises the newly lighted flame 
above the damp, and forms a steady foundation for any size 
of pile’ [For kindling a fire, when well-dried twigs are 

Xp. 


306 FORT CARLTON UNAP. XIX, 


scarce, pare shavings from a stick with your knife. If all 
the wood is wet, cut into a log and take shavings from near 
the heart, at which depth there will seldom be much 
dampness. ] 

‘Pine logs are the best, burning with a brilliant light 
and aromatic smell ; poplar, however, is the only available tree 
in the prairie districts: When dry it answers very well: 
its great fault is its explosiveness. You feel as if standing 
a siege, as crack follows crack at measured intervals ; while 
each report is‘accompanied with a red-hot projectile shot 
slowly through the air, and dropped with precision on some 
weak point in the fortress——your blankets perhaps, or the 
dry grass at your feet, or some article of clothing that may’ 
lie open to attack. , 

‘The wind shifted to the west to-day, but snow fell 
frequently and the sky became thick with haze, so we 
camped early at the edge of the great plain [as we supposed 
it], having only marched about ten miles. Saw a single 
buffalo bull.’ 

November 26th.—' Westerly wind; fine, clear day, but 
very cold. Crossed the plain in about four and a half hours, 
and finding timber, an hour afterwards, thought it advisable 
to camp. The want of a guide compels us to these ‘short 
marches. Everywhere the snow lies about two feet deep, 
and the cart track has been long obliterated, so that when 
the country is shrouded in mist we cannot go forward, and . 

our fear of not finding firewood about nightfall, leads us 
to camp early, as soon as a suitable place,occurs. After 
Touchwood Hills we expect to get on better. 

‘Saw another solitary buffalo bull. M‘Kay rode off 
after a fox, and I joined him near the finish—getting a roll 
in the snow, by the bye, from old Cendré’s putting hig foot 


CHAP. XIX, TO TOUCHWOOD HILLS. 307 


into a badger-hole. The unfortunate fox could not run fast 
in the deep snow, and, after struggling on for a mile, tried 
to hide among some bushes, whence he was soon drawn 
out, and killed by a few blows on the nose.’ 

[We ran another fox, and lost him in the strangest iay, 
just as we thought him our own, M‘Kay pressed him hard 
on one side, and I on the other, his strength was failing,— 
his chance seemed hopeless, for no shelter lay Lefare him, 
neither bush nor hollow, only a vast white expanse of glitter- 
ing smoothness. Still he laboured on, and we wondered at 
his courage: but the secret was soon revealed,—on a sudden 
he made an active spring, and disappeared head ‘foremost 
into the snow. Down we leapt to secure him—beheld a 
gaping badger-hole, pointing towards the centre of the 
earth ! ae yon 

By what instinct could.the fox’discover the exact posi- 
tion of that hole? He went through the thick mass of snow 
in one clean header, straight as a plummet to his mark. 
No difference on the smooth, shining surface was visible to 
us, yet the fox, in all his fear and peril, could exactly light 
upon the entrance of this concealed; and apparently long 
unfrequented, burrow.] 

‘The fur of our fox was “ prime,’—as the phrase is 
here,—that is‘ to say, he was in his complete winter coat, 
which had not been long enough in wear to become torn or 
rusty. In buffalo robes the season makes a great difference. 
Before November the hair is not long enough, and after 


New Year’s day it gets ragged, and its rich black-brewn is. 


bleached to the colour of tow, especially along the animal's 
back. The robes are generally taken from cows, and some- 
times from young bulls, but never from the old bulls, whose 
hides are much too thick and heavy. . 


308 FORT CARLTON OMAP. XIX. 


‘Most robes are found to have been split ‘down the 
middle and sewn up again, the object for this process being 
to lighten the labour of dressing the skin, as few women are 
able to prepare a complete hide without assistance. Some 
Indians, when asked why they have married more than one 


wife, will answer that each wife requires another to help 


her in dressing the robes. 


‘ Just before sunset -I observed two false suns, swimming 


in small, nearly perpendicular segments of a circle of pris- 
matic colours, on each side of the true sun. This appear- 

‘ ance, Iam told, is common; two other false suns are also 
frequently visible above and below, the whole forming a 
cross of fivé orbs. Night clear: an aurora-light in the west, 
whence the wind continued to blow,’ 

—— Sunday, November 27th‘ Marched for about three 
hows among brush and poplar clumps, and at noon found 
ourselves at the edge of ‘a great plain, utterly bare, bounded 
by a faint blue line ofidistant wood, amidst which some 

"* Jow hills appeared. M‘Kay and I held a short consultation, 

“whether to camp now, or push on without stopping for 

dinner, at the risk of having to camp on the open plain, 

without fue¥——and decided on the latter course, as we could 
not bear losing another day. Accordingly we marched.” 

‘At sunset the woods appeared little nearer than before, 
but we pressed on till long after’ dark: hoping to* teach 
some shelter. Suddenly we found ourselves in a swamp, of 
the kind that never completely freezes; * our horses were 
plunging about, up to their girths in mire; it became im- 
possible to proceed, so we halted where we were, and took a 
hasty supper, consisting of cold pemmican, with the water we 
succeeded in melting from snow by burning wisps of grass. 


-* It had*some saline or mineral properties. 


a 


CHAP. XIX. TO TOUCHWOOD HILLS. 309 


If there had been rushes, we might have made a hot enough 
fire to boil our kettle, but with grass this cannot be done. 

‘The night was not so cold as it often is, and we slept 
pretty comfortably. The wind was south-west and not 
high: had a storm arisen, the horses, unable to endure it on 
so bare a plain, would have run before the wind all night, 
and we should probably have lost them.’ 

November 28th—‘ Set off about 8 o’clock, with a bitter 
cold south-easterly gale right in our faces. We crossed the 
swamp by going round a little way, and hoped soon to gain 
the woods, which seemed about six miles distant; but we 
were woefully deceived, through the levelness of the snow- 
covered plain, and it cost us three hours and a half of hard 


work to get to the first poplar clumps, which are several 
miles from the real woods themselves. Breakfast and fire, 
however, were so welcome as to remove all diseontented 
feelings; and at 2 o'clock we continued our march, intend- 
ing to camp about sunset ; but, just as we thought of halting, 
we came upon fresh snow-shoe tracks from the very direc- 
tion in which we supposed the Fort to lie,-so we went on, 
in the faint hope of getting there that night. 

‘The light at this season keeps tolerably. good for more 
than an hour after sunset, and the. clearness of the sky 
enabled us to follow the tracks; it grew very dark at last, 
and we were preparing to halt, but at that moment heard 
the barking of dogs, and riding to the brow of the next slope 
beheld sparks proceeding from a chimney; a welcome illu- 
mination, which in a few minutes guided us to the door of 
Touchwood Hills Fort,—where we were hospitably re- 
ceived by the superintendent, Mr. Taylor. It was a great 
pleasure to find three newspapers with European news up to 
the 30th June—the time of the conclusion of the armistice 
after the battle of Solferino.’ 


310, FORT CARLTON CHAP, XIX, 


November 29tkh—A tremendous storm set in, with high 
north-west wind and heavy snow; we were glad to be safely | 
sheltered in the Fort. It was a rough little settlement, but 
extremely habitable in its way: the large room in particular, 
with'its log-piled hearth directly opposite the door, was the 
very model of homely comfort and cheerfulness. 

- —‘Heard from Mr. Taylor that we had made a narrow 
escape when at the Elbow last July. A large camp of 
Crees, it seems, had despatched twelve men to follow on: our 
track, with the view of getting .tobacco and anything else 
they could. They came to where we had ‘crossed the South 
Branch, the very day that we set out from the opposite side 
of the river, and there, to their surprise, observed a camp of 
Blackfeet occupying the ground we had just left-—On- sight-of-—- 
“ their enemies, they instantly turned back, hoping they had 
not been noticed, but the Blackfeet had seen them, and at 
once despatched all their available warriors to pursue, them 
to their camp, and endeavour to steal some horses. 

‘The Blackfeet party succeeded in getting among the 
horses at night, and were beginning to drive them away, 
when the Crees discovered them, and rushed to the attack 
with @ superior force; upon which the invaders made their 
retreat, and all got clear off, except one man who had been 
unlucky enough to mount himself on a very slow old mare 
belonging to his enemies. 

‘Finding that he could not escape by flight, he dis- 
mounted and hid in a thicket, trusting that the darkness 
would conceal him ; but a y6ung Assiniboine, who was with 
the Crees, thinking he saw something run into the bush, 
went to examine it more closely, and verified his observation 
by feeling an arrow graze his side, as he nearly trod on the 
lurking warrior. 


CHAP. XIX. TO TOUCH WOOD, HILLS. 311 
{ 


‘Like lightning he stove in the Bick joot’s head with his 


tomahawk, and, the Crees coming up, a hoprible scene ensned. 
Not content with scalping their victim, they skinned his limbs 
and cut him in pieces, they ate his fleéh and drank his blood ; 
and made their appearance at this Fort, displaying portions 
of the poor wretohs body as trophies. His hair was grey. 
‘As concerns me, this affair resembles the story of the 
man pursued by a titer’ on one side and a crocodile on the 
other. The tiger springs into the reptile’s jaws, the man, 
meanwhile escapes. Had the Blackfeet not seen and followed 
the Crees, they would certainly have tracked my party, and 
at the least tried to steal our horses,—which we should: have 


resisted, and lives would have been lost,—nay, probably they 


-would have attacked us at once, as the tribe has become so 


bitterly hostile to Europeans this year. 

‘Had we been overtaken by the Crees, our horses would 
have been in danger, though these Indians are friendly with 
the whites, and in many ways they would have been 


‘troublesome visitors. We have reason to thank God for 


preserving us from these dangers—“dangers we could not have 
avoided, whose very existence we were ignorant of. A few 
weeks ago, Mr. Taylor was informed by Mr. 8 [an 
English gentleman travelling in the country], that it was 
believed that I and all my men had been killed by the 
Blackfeet. I trust this report will not reach home.’ 


Ned 


A  , 


a) oo 
a 
ae 


CHAPTER XxX. 


TARCHIVOOD HILLS TO FORT PELLY. far 


NOVEMBER 30th—About one o'clock in the afteracon 
we took our departure from Touchwood Hills Fort. We 
found ourselves obliged to leave Jasper and Mousey behind, 
both being so utterly exhausted as to be unfit for further work, 
without a good long interval for repose. In the latter I took 
-n0 interest at all, but it distressed me to part with the 
handsome pony which had carried me so gallantly in the 
Rocky Mountains. But he was now reduced to a skeleton, 
hy cold, poor feeding, and the unwonted labour of hauling 
at a sled, to which necessity had compelled us to subject 
him, and I saw that leaving him at once in comfortable 
uarters was the only chance of saving his life. Unhappily 
it was not so fated. While staying at Fort Pelly, towards 
the end of the year, a man, who arrived from the other Fort, 
brought me the news of Poor Jasper’s, decease. He died 
a few days after we left him, from an attack of‘inflammation, 
brought on perhaps by a too sudden change from cold and 
hunger to warmth and plentiful food. 

The day of our departure was clear and ‘intensely cold ; 
there was a high wind also, but happily our old experience 
was reversed, and the strength of the gale fell merely on 
our backs, as we continued our journey towards the south- 
east. I doubt if the Fort we then. quitted any longer exists, 


cuar. xx, TOUCHWOOD -HILLS TO FORT PELLY. 313 


for we heard of an intention to move it the following summer 
to Little. Touchwood Hills—a place about thirty miles dis- 
tant, in the direction of Qwappelle Fort, which was also to 
' be dismantled, and the two posts conjoined. 

The country that. afternoon. .was—hilly, and diversified 
with many small lakes: it was apparently thickly wooded, 
but no trees of any size were to be seen,—a shabby growth 
of willow and poplar brush for the most part overspreading 
the ground. . 

December 1st. — ‘Intensely cold night. My gloves hav- 
ing gone astray, I had to wait some time after breakfast 
was ready till they were found, for the steel in the knife 
and fork handles stuck to my skin, burning like hot iron. 
The tea-cup kept freezing to the saucer when any tea ran 
over, requiring some little force to remove it. Taking up a 
brass candlestick hastily, I had to drop it more hastily—it 
felt red-hot. “ 

‘The sun fortunately shone brightly all day, and lessened 
the cold, and the wind was still at our back. We made a 
six hours’ march without halting, crossing a bare plain about 
twelve miles wide, near the edge of which we camped, hav- 
ing altogether marched some eighteen miles.— Re-reading 
“Troilus and Cressida.”’ 

[As I read this fine, although singular play, certain lines 
in Agamemnon’s speech to the princes so forcibly impressed: 
themselves on me, that for days afterwards they were con- 
-stantly in my thoughts, as strengtheners and consolers 
amidst all the hardships of the journey. When the frost : 
bit keenest, and the icy winds congealed one’s blood, and 
the men were cheerless and silent, and the skeleton horses 
slaved wearily along,—hour following hour in miserable 
monotony, till life was almost too grievous to endure,—ever 


s 


. J 
314 TOUCH WOOD HILLS CHAY. XX, 


and again somé angel’s voice seemed to breathe into my 
inner hearing, in calm yet triumphant tones— 


y And call them shames? which are indeed nought else 

“ But the protractive trials of great Jove 

To find persistive constancy in man : 

The fineness of which metal is not found 

In fortune's Jove.” 

Jt is true that these words were not entirely appropri- 
__ate,—for we could not have retreated if we would,—but they 
were not the less consoling: Shakespeare’s utterances are 
magical, there is ‘occult virtue in them. They speak in 
plain language to the understanding, but they have also an 
inexplicable power to strengthen the spirit in mysterious, 
hidden ways.] oe 

December 24—‘ Tried the snow-shoes for the first time, 
and walked in them for an hour, getting on capitally, with 
the exception of two or three falls at starting. It is a great 
relief to tread on the firm surface which the snow-shoe gives, 
for wading through deep snow is most fatiguing ; but the 
weight hanging on one’s legs soon begins to tell, and even 
experienced walkers are apt to get their feet badly ent by 
the frozen straps. 

‘Some of the horses, especially the two Cendrés, have 
lost the hair from the lower part of their legs, through the 
sharpness of the hard crusted’ snow, and the frost acting ‘on 
the exposed skin has opened bleeding wounds. This is one 
great drawback to travelling with horses in winter. 

“We marched about eighteen miles, and camped at dusk 
by the Beaver Hill Creek. Just before sunset the wind 
changed t6 east, and light snow showers began to fall. It 
‘grew extremely cold, and the wood being damp did not 
burn freely, a great misery under such circumstances,’ 


fl 
. f 
* é 
CHAP. XX. TO FORT PELLY. : 315 


[The intensity of the cold produced an effect I do not 
remember observing hefore or since,—it seemed to crush 
out the vitality of the fire As soon as the feeble flame 
arose, it lost its colour, and died out gradually from the 
point downwards. It must have been a good half-hour 
before the fire was fairly kindled, and till then it threw out 
scarcely a ray of heat. Our camp was in a low-lying 
dampish hollow, closely surrounded by young poplar-brush.] 

December 3d.—‘Milder day, but snowing a_ little. 
Started late, and camped early at the Smoke Tent Wood 
—distance about twelve miles. This is called half-way to 
Fort Pelly. We have been passing through mare wood than 
of late, but the country keeps a prairie character, and bears no 
appearance of fertility. M‘Kay had tea with me to-night’ 
[t always took my meals alone, unless -now and then when 
M‘Kay joined me on special invitation. Breakfast, dinner, 
tea, or supper—whatever the name of the repast—it con- 
sisted much of the same materials,—tea, flour-cakes, and 
such meat as happened to be available. At this particular 
time my own dish was generally supplied with slices of beef, 
cut from huge frozen joints brought from one or other of the 
Forts. Sometimes I chose dried meat for a variety, but 
pemmican—the chief food of the rest of the party—I 
. seldom cared to taste. When currants or raisins were among 
our stores, Toma would boil them with flour or rice, and 
serve up very tolerable puddings. Near the Elbow he made 
me a delicious jelly ‘with Saskootoom berries;—much’' to my 


x 


astonishment. | 
- Sunday, December 4th.—' Traversed a prairie some eight 


miles wide, through which the White Mud River flows, 
expanded into a lake . where we crossed it; ‘afterwards 
passed through a partially wooded country, and camped after. 


316 . TOUCHIVOOD HILLS CHAP. XX, 


a five or six hours’ march, during which we probably made 
upwards of sixteen miles. ' 

‘Three hours of the time I walked on snow-shoes, 
getting on well at first, but latterly suffermg much from 
blistered feet, and great fatigue in the thigh muscles, though 
my aukles felt no strain. ; 

‘People at home commonly imagine snow-shoes to be 
like velocipedes, implements which enable the wearer to 
outstrip the wind and. outstay the stoutest pedestrian; but 
this is far from the truth, for though these network plat- 
forms enable the wearer to traverse deep snow with com- 
parative ease, and even to overtake swift animals under 
favourable circumstances, they are nothing but encumbrances 
in themselves, adding to the fatigue and diminishing the pace.. 

‘The Lapland ‘skidor’ are totally different things, more 
like enormous skates (to judge by description), and capable 
of helping the wearer to great swiftness; but nothing of’ 


SNOW-SHOE AND SKIDOR, . 


the kind is used in this country,—why, I cannot explain. 
Perhaps the snow is more hard and icy in thenorth of 
Europe, and thus better suited for long narrow, sliders.* 


* A snow-shoe is a leaf-shaped framing of wood, filled in with a fine nétwork 
of leather thongs, and turned up in front like the prow of a boat. “ The ‘foot 
is attached to the main bar by straps passing round the heel, but only fixing 
the toes, so that the heel rises after cach step, and’ the tail of the’ shoe is 
dragged on the snow. . . . . The length is from four to six feet, and 
the breadth one foot and a half, or one foot and three quarters, being adapted 
to the size of the wearer. The motion of walking in them is perfectly natural, 


cHAR xX ‘TO FORT PELLY. | 317 
\ 
‘This was about the coldest day we have had. Though 
well covered, I got slightly frost- bitten on: ‘the neck and left 
ear, for the bitter north wind pierced through everything. No 
exercise gave warmth, and towards evening I began to feel 
unwell, but an immense carip-fire 800n | revived«my powers. 
‘The horses are looking wretched; a week of this 
‘travelling reduéeg,; them more than months of hard work in 
summer. The ‘Poor~things have no food but the dry grass 
they find after scraping away the snow. This forms the 
principal food -of the Buffaloes in winter, but their road 
snouts are better fitted than a horse's thinly covered 1°68 os 
for removing masses of deep snow. 7 
December 5th.—‘ Started jate, at 10 o'clock, and camped 
at 2PM. Maclean, alias The Night, gave out, and was left 
on the road. My dear old Cendré was-with difficulty brought 
into camp; indeed our early halt was chiefly on his account. 


~ 


for one shoe is level with the snow when-the edge of the other is passing 
‘overit . . . . Eachshoe weighs about two pomnds when unclogged with 
snow.”"——-FRANKLIN, —Journcy to the Polar Sea, 1819-22, 4to, 1828, pp. 94-95, 
Searching i in Mr. Lloyd's works for information on the subject of the Euro- ° 
pean snow-skates, I find that these implements vary considerably in pattern. 
In parts of Scandinavia the skidor—which are narrow slips of wood, generally 
turned up ‘at the foremost ends,—are of unequal length, the skida on the 
left foot ranging. from 9 to 12 feet in length, while that for the right is 
about three feet shorter; the breadth of each being between 2 and 3 inches. 
In parts of Lapland and Finland, however, the skidor are of équal length 
on each foot, but seldom exceed 6 or 7 fect, and are much broader than 
those previously mentioned.’ A pair may weigh from 10 to 15 pounds. 
In running upon skidor the motion resembles that of ordinary skating. 
If the ground be falling and the snow in good order, a man may go at almost 
any pace, but everything depends on the state of the snow and the nature of 
the country. A good runner may accomplish from 6 to 7 miles within the 
hour, or for a short distance perhaps very much more. Men might possibly be 
ound who could perform 50 miles in seven or eight hours, or not impossibly 
100 miles in double that space of time. Mr. Lloyd (whose words I have been 
partly quoting) proceeds to contrast the skidor with the American snow-shogs. 


318 TOUCHWOOD IIILLS CHAP, XX. 


‘The road ,.kept along small poplar woods all day. The 
country appears itore fertile than on the other side of White 
Mud River. 

‘ Wind north- west, and not much of it, weather foggy, cold 
very great. Between 8 and 9 p.m. there was a perfect circle 
of light round the, nearly {ull moon, its radius about twenty 
diameters of the moon,—no prismatic colours apparent.’ 

December Gth——‘ A most beautiful day. There was 


"very little wind, and that from the south, and the sun shone 
brightly. 


‘Marched about thirteen miles through a wooded 
country, full of sinall swampy Jakes. Some of the horses 
could hardly get on, the intense cold of the nights had so 
weakened them, while the frost had seized on their legs, all 
torn and cut by the hard crusted snow. 

‘Little Ned grew quite lame, and my poor Cendré gave 
out. Duncan and I did all we could to bring him on, but 


In favour of the latter, he instances its trifling weight, and believes it 
may answer better if the snow be in & loose state. Apart from these advan- 
tages, he considers that the skidor are “ immeasurably superior” to the snow - 
shoes; assigning, however, no reason, except that while the former never 
injure the feet or ankles, the latter cause great suffering to a person unaccus- 
tomed to their use. This is a weak argument, for the ‘‘mal de racquet,” 
as stated, only affects a beginner: it would rather seem to me that, the 
supposition in my journal is correct and that each ivaplement is best in its 
own sphere,—the skidor helping to rapid motion on the ice-like surface of 
hard-frozen snow, the snow-shoe facilitating steady progression over snow of a 
Jess firm consistency. A sort of snow-shoe is used by the Scandinavian 
peasants as a substitute for skidor, when the snow is deep. These, which are 
named Skarbogar, are merely frames of wicker-work, of a roundish, or rather 
oval shape, about 15 inches in length and 12 in breadth. During my journey 
between Fort Pelly and Fort Garry (see fp. 336), Kline made Simself a pair of 
small implements very ranch of the same description, but provided with soles 
of network instead of wickerwork. (See Luoyp,—Fidd Sports v the Nerth 
of Europe, 8vo0, 1830, vol. it. pp. 218-224.) 


—~ 
cffar, xx. _-° TO FORT PELLY. 319 
. tee 

in vain; &., just able to drive him intdO\q sheltered 
place, and then he stopped. I was grieved to the ‘heart, for 
of all the horses I have owned I liked this one best; I felt a 
real friendship for him. or four months he had been with 
me in my journeys,—always gentle, affectionate, and spirited, 
and full of amusing ways ;—and now he was to be a prey ~ 
to the wolves and the ravens. He seemed lively and 
strong when we left Touchwood Hills, and I hoped to . 
have ‘taken him many a stage farther, and left him in 
some harbour of refuge, but his falling off was too suddeti 
to Have been expected by human foresight—so farewell, 
poor Cendré! 

‘Very melancholy I rejoined my people, and soon after- 
wards we halted for dinner. Just as we were starting, after 
_ a two hours’ rest, some one thought he heard a distant neigh. 
.’ Presently it was repeated, and we recognised old Cendré’s 

voice. The noble horse had struggled on, determined to 
overtake his friends,—it was the only instance of such 
courage arhong the many cases of given-out horses during my 
journey. We resolved to.make a great effort to save him. 
Matheson accordingly stayed back and devoted himself to. 
bringing on Cendré to our night encampment. I am thank- 
ful to say he has succeeded, and as we cannot be more than 
twenty miles from Fort Pelly I trust the gallant beast will 
yet be saved, and restored to his former health and beauty 
by careful keeping. 

‘Our guide, Josey, got frost-bitten in one foot, but was 

- able to go on. 

‘Much struck by a paper in an old number of Chambcrs's 
Journal on the subject of Gratitude. In most cases of 
‘alleged ingratitude, so says the writer, the fault is as much 
with the giver of favours as thé. receiver; for either the 


t 


320 . TOUCHWOOD HILIS CHAP. XX, 


favour has been unsought, is little valued, and is not a fair 
tender for the article gratitude ; or else, a real benefit having 
been conferred, the beheliter expects too much in return, and 
seeks ’to reduce-the ‘obliged man ‘to moral slavery——as if the 
proverb “one good turn deserves another,” should be changed 
to—“ deserves a lifetime of other.” 

‘Those seem to me eyually wrong who profess surprise 


“at gratitude or ingratitude. People so often mean better 


than they act, or act Letter than they mean, that all divings 
into other men’s hearts, either for prophecy or condemnation, 
are ‘vain. and elusive, The best- maxim is this—‘* Hope 
ever. Expect never.” . 

‘But, indeed, prayer should always be a wish 
rather than a demand,—certain as we may feel that our 
desire is for that which is good. How can we tell? We 
might be praying for the immediate reform of some wicked 
person, when God knew that such a sudden change would 
be only superficial, and that sin’s frost must go deeper into 
the soil of the man’s heart, cracking it and pulverising it, 
before the thaw of repentance could reach to its uttermost 
depths. 

‘We might be praying for humility when self-reliant 
strength was our need, or for purity when morbid sensitive- 
ness to evil was our bane, for rigid truth when we required 
lenient charity, for fortitude when we Jacked the gift of 
sympathy, for resignation when action was demanded of us. 

‘Nay, we might even, i more general terms, pray to be 
spiritually minded, when something more of earthly minded- 
ness than we possessed was wanted for the service of our 
neighbours.’ 

December 7th.‘ After a wearisome march of four hours 
we were obliged tu camp by the Assiniboine River, some 


CHAP. XX. ; TO FORT PELLY. 393 


twelve miles, it is supposed, from the Fort. The horses are 


~ jn a sad state, hardly able to drag themselves along. Poor 


Cendré stopped again, half-way; whether he can now-be™ 
saved i is doubtful—alas! - f an 


— 


i aa 


' - Black spruces. mingle with-tli@] poplars til within five 
miles from the rivér, and the soil appears to assume more 
of the prairie character—but where everything is buried 
under two or three feet of ‘snow, it is difficult to judge with 
certainty. Some of the spruces were beautiful specimens, 
though not remarkable for size. 

‘Walked nearly all yesterday and to-day,— my left 
ankle much strained from labouring through the deep snow. 
Had a narrow escape this morning—a tall tree, against which 
my fire was built, got undermined and suddenly fell, crash- 
ing down within two feet of my head asI stood at the tent 
door.’ : 

December 8th.—‘ A. little snow during night, and the 


wind ‘rose high, but being southerly it made the weather | 


-inuch milder. M‘Kay and Josey started early, on snow- 
shoes, for the Fort ; Iafterwards followed them on horseback, 
and found the distance greater than had been supposed, 
being sixteen miles at least. 

‘At the Mission-house Mr. Murray’s cariole was waiting 
my arrival, Glad to dismount, [ placed myself in it, and 
the team of dogs took me over the remaining mile of the 
journey at a pace that seemed absolute flying, after our last 
week’s two-mile-and-a-half an hour crawl.’ 


ee 


C HAPTER XXI. 
FORT PELLY. 


DECEMBER 9th— Fort Pelly, pleasantly situated on rising 
ground, is a new, square, white-washed cottage with small 
dormer windows in the roof, and offers better accommodation 
than any house I have seen since leaving Red River. Various 
out-honses for stores, etc., surround it at the back and sides, 
but the Saulteaux Indians of the district are so peaceable that 
no stockade has been thought necessary. Looking from the 
front windows the eye ranges over a large extent of flat 
country, swamp and willows first, and then an interminable 
_ border of poplars intérspersed with pines. 

‘In the mnimediate foreground stand the remains of the 
old Fort, partly occupied by the servants and partly converted 
into cattle- houses. Not far-off flows the Assiniboine, here 
an insignifigant.,.steeam scarce twenty yards wide, and not 
. deep. In spring theré is water enough for boats, but in 
summer the channel is nearly dry. , 

‘Mr. Murray has given me a very comfortable room, and 
obligingly invited me to form one of his family party, We 
shall have to stay here a long time, as dogs are scarce, and 
will have to be sent for to various places,—travelling farther 
with horses is ont of the question, in this deep snow. : 

‘The weathér has become really warm, the sun quite 
_ oppressive. Not an atom of ice on beards and moustaches, 
the state of which I find the best thermometer. 


WAP, XXt. FORT PELLY. ; 323. 


‘Read a very curious story from Blackwood’s Magazine 
called the “Haunted House.”’ (“The Haunters and the 
Haunted,’—one of Lord Lytton’s most perfect and interest- 
ing works, though perhaps too melodramatic in the propheti- 


~~ eal scene towards the end.] 


December 10th—* A lovely day——too warm in fact. Mr 
Murray tells me that this has been an unprecedentedly cold 
opening of winter. The mercury has constantly frozen in 
his thermometer, on some days he believes the temperature 
to have been 40° below zero, 

‘Walked out to see the horses and cattle. All my beasts 
look the better for their rest. I have given Ned to Mr. . 
Murray, that he may be carefully tended and well used—as 
will certainly be the case. There is a well-shaped bull, a 
cross between Ayrshire and Shorthorn, there are also a 
number of cows, some pure Ayrshires,—about seventy alto- 
gether. They farm a little, growing potatoes and barley ; 
turnips will also grow, but are not cultivated to any extent,’ 

In the afternoon I took my gun, and went out on snow- 
shoes with Mr. Macdonald, a clerk in the Company’s service, 
of recent appointment, little more than a year having passed 
since he left his home in Inverness-shire, near Mr. E———’s 
Highland deer-forest. .. . . . Wehada pleasant walk, 
but saw no game. . 

Sunday, December 11th—There was morning service as 
usual at the old Fort, condueted by the Rev. Mr. Settee—a 
gentleman of Cree origin, who had been appointed to the 
spiritual charge of this district by the Church Missionary 
Society. I was interested in hearing of his relationship to 
the well-known Newton, the poet Cowper's friend, his grand- 
mother being the daughter of Newton's father, who lived 
near Hudson’s Bay during the last two years of his life, 


age 
ty 


4 


_ 


B24 FORT PELLY. CHAP. XXI, 


« 


‘Mr, Settee is an agreeable man and a good missionary ; 
but here, as in most places, the Indians obstinately refuse 
to be Christians, though many of them are ready enough to 
submit to the cetemony of baptism . . . . . There 
appears to be no foundation for the idea that the Indians 
are panting for religious instruction, and that nothing is 
wanted’ for their general conversion but a larger ‘supply ‘of 
zealous missionaries and the establishment of a few more 
schools. Certain tribes, or sections of tribes, are no doubt 
less unteachable than the rest, these, however, form decidedly 
exceptional cases. . . . fe 
. ‘The service at the old Fort was attended by all 
my men, and some of the Company's servants, but I did not 
observe any Indians—indeed there are few of them in the 
neighbourhood just now. 

‘In the evening we had a visit from “ Clipgy iy? an old In- 
dian hanger-on about the place, who reported that his brother 
had shot a moose. These animals are tolerably plentiful in 
the district, but red-deer (eapiti) are not found in any num- | 
bers nearer than Fort Ellice. Lynxes and foxes aré common, 
wolves rare, buffalo never come within several days’ march. 

‘A few nights ago, Mr. Murray heard his-dog barking 
incessantly for no apparent reason. Happening next morn- 
ing to open a half-finished storehouse, the, dog rushed 
furiously in,—but came out again with still dreater quick- 
ness; upon which his master looked into ‘the shed, and 
there beheld the cause of the disturbance, in the shape 
of a wolverine, who after -his nocturnal prowlings had 
taken refuge in this convenient hiding-place. The beast 
was slowly ‘retteating, with his face to the door through , 
which the dog had entered, but an ounce of shot soon tamed 
his courage by ending his life. 


CHAP, XXI. FORT PELLY.: - 325 


‘The wolverine—called by the French, carcajou—is an” 
animal of the weasel tribe, somewhat like a skunk in form, 
but a great deal larger. His body is about the size of an 
ordinary pointer’s ; he has short, immensely strong legs armed 
with great ‘claws, his snout is short and rather uptumed, his 
mouth furnished with powerful teeth, his tail short, black 
and bushy ; his fur, chiefly of a dark-brown grey, is long and 
handsome, though not of much value. / 

‘No beast is so cunning as the wolverine—the fox is 4 
sucking dove compared to him. He laughs traps to,scorn, 
taking the bait away Without getting caught, as cleverly as 
could any human being—more so indeed than some, for 

‘there are persons who habitually get more trap than bait 
during their lifelong trespass in this world’s preserves. 

‘Where he haunts it is useless to store meat on stages, 
for, beaver-like, he cuts through great trees with his teeth, 
and soon brings down any edifice of wood. His courage is 
dauutless, he flees neither from man nor beast, and woe to * 
the dog that comes within reach of his jaws. 

‘Wolverines live in pairs, and it is said that when one 
is killed the other invariably finds its way to the place-of 
slaughter ; a long time may ‘elapse, put sooner or later it 
makes its appearance there for the benefit of the hunters—- 
like the Hindoo widow immolating herself on her husband’s 


corpse. * + “ 

‘December 12th—*‘ Snowstorm all day. Old Clippy came | 
again, and walking straight into my room, without knocking, 
made request for tea and sugar; of which, a small’ present 
soon gladdened the heart of the poor old man. He has 

*Gulo Luseus. | The Wolverine. Ommecthatsces, okcecoohageu,' and okee- 
coohaugees — Cree Indians. Careajou—~French Canadians. Quickehatch ~ 


English Residents at Hudson’s Bay: * Ricwanpsox,—Faun. Bor. ~Am., vol. 
ip. 41. 


326 FORT PELLY. CHAP. XXI, 


none of the sort of pride that generally belongs to-the Indian 
character. My. Murray one day reproved him for going into 
private rooms without warning, telling him that everybody 
should knock at the *Beor in such cases——* Ob yes,” said 
Clippy, “but i am nobody, “Pranrmrahing, I am such a very 
poor creature.’ as 

Dosguber 13th.—* Colder day-—a fely degrees below zero. 
Went through the stores,—not many furs just, now. This 
is the great battle-field between the Company and the free 
traders, and the Indians consequently get many presents to 
. keep them to their allegiance. One chief, for example, 
lately got articles to the value of fifty skins (upwards of £6 
jn value) and the.inferior men receive large presents also. 
The Company has regular tariff-prices in each district, 
which ane never departed from, and any Indian to whom 
particular favour is meant receives a suitable present, but 
neither gets more for his furs, nor pays less for his supplies, 
than the tariff directs. 

‘Free competition would do the Indians more harm than’ 
good, for any advantage they might gain from the under- 
selling of rival traders could only last a.few years, and would 
be much outweighed by the evils following the unchecked - 
distribution of immense quantities of spirits. .A powerful 
Company, moreover, has the means of supplying goods to a 
district, far cheaper and more regularly ‘than can be done by 
private. hands,—and there is a strong guarantee for their 
moderation, in those natural promptings of self-interest 
which keep sagadious nen from killing the goose that lays 
the golden eggs. ; 

‘In the Missouri country, some years ago, when several 
rival companies existed, the selling price of goods, as com- 
pared with their cost pricesseems to have been about six 


J 
# 


ra 
ae 


CHAP, XXI. FORT PELLY., 327 


tames greater than that fixed by the Hudson’s Bay Company's 
general tariff, which reserves a very narrow margin of profit, 
so natrow indeed that on certain articles there is a loss. 

‘It is a mistake to suppose that spirits are supplied to 
the Indians in large quantity from the Company’s stores. 
In the northern districts spirits are not allowed to enter the 
country; and in no case are they a medium of traffic for 


furs, though in the southern districts rum is exchanged for’, 


provisions, which cannot be got on other terms. 


‘It is only when the Indian is in communication with * 


free traders- that he “becomes a regular drunkard, those who 
deal only with the Company confining themselves (or rather, 
being confined) to two grand “régales” in course of the year, 
the first when théy receive their supplies before the hunting 
_ season, the second when they return with the ‘products of 
the chase. Morally this custom must be injurious to them, 
physically it is harmless, nay beneficial, for the sickness 
following their intemperance relieves them from the bile 
caused by their excessive consumption of fat meat when 
buffalo are plentiful. 
‘Too strong 2 distinction cannot be drawn between the 
relations of the ‘YIndians with the Company in the northern 
‘and southern districts :—in the former, the Company is all- 
‘powerful, and rules its submissive subjects w ith a mild and 
equitable sway ; in the latter, free traders of every sort press 
hard upon it, and flood the country with bad whisky, w hile 
the independent Indians, roaming the plains in great bands, 
are too strong to be controlled by the handfuls of men at 
the Forts, whom, so far from obeying ssthty often put. in fear ‘of 
their lives.’ . ’ 
December “14th— The indiaw Ww ho By as sent for old 
Cendré brought him in this morning, and %. had the pleasure 


\ 


328 FORT. PELLY,. CHAP. XXI, 


of seeing my favourite again: he looks wretchedly thin, but _ 


care may restore him. The men despatched to Fort Ellice 
for dogs have also returned,— having lost their way; I shall 
not be able to start for more than a week. 

‘Walked afew miles with Mr. Murray, and called on 


Mr. Settee. Heard an anecdote about a mulatto, the offspring - — | 


of a Negro and an Indian woman, who when the last eclipse 
took place, exclaimed—“ This is my birthday. That is why 
Tam so dark,—there was no sun when I was born.” 

‘ Also another about an Indian (whose name was told me), 
who being urged by the missionaries to become a Christian, 


' that he might go to heaven when he died, answered—that_ 


he did not wish to become a Christian; and that if he were 
one, he would rather go to hell, because there, though in 
pain, he could walk about, whereas in heaven he must sit 
still and sing psalms all day. I am assured that this story 
is true, and that the Indian spoke in sober earnest, and not 
in mockery. We are apt to undervalue the acuteness of 
savages.” 


% 


December 15th——‘ Drove a short distance in a horse * ” 


cdriole, but for want of a proper track it swung about like 
a ship in a storm, and at last upset, rolling Mr. Murray and 
_ myself in the’ snow. 

- ‘There is a burying-ground near the Fort, used by Indians 
as well as the Company’s people. Over one of the newest 
graves is fixed a pole, from which are suspended several 
‘buttons, a tobacco-bag of bark and beads, a piece of tobacco, 
and a human hand dried and sina. This is -the grave of 
an Indian’s wife. She was young, handsome, and apparently 
healthy, but a concealed disease affected her heart, and one 
day she fell down in a faint and died. Her husband was 
drunk at the time, and on coming to himself his grief was 


of? 


CHAP, XXI. : FORT PELLY. - 329 


terrible. This it might be thought would have cured him 
of his evil habit, but, on the contrary, as soon ‘asthe first 
paroxysm of grief was over he came and begged for rum, 
-—" because his heart was heavy and he wanted to Tuake it 
_ light. an ~y aa 

‘ There was an Indian in the north country who, on meet- 
ing with a similar loss, went away into the mountains and 
lived there for two years without seeing a human being; he 
then returned, with such an enormous number of marten 
skins that le was unable to take goods for even half of them, 

. and the rest rermained, ais credit. 

_ ‘The Indians ate not so healthy-a race as-is sometimes 
“imagined, stomach and chest coniplaints frequently occurring 
and the women being- subject’ to various § Temale a e ailments that 
are common in “Europe: As physicians ‘their own *medicine- 
men’ ’ appear” F to be useless. . When an Indian is ill he geen. 
* oly applies | at the nearest Fort, where he obtains good 

a jedicine, ond | medical advice if the ‘Company’ 3 officer- 
~  In- charge’ “has studied the subject, as he often has, Food 
and shélter too are sometimes given him until health is 
restored." - - i 
‘In surgical cases, especially in the cure \of gunshot 
wounds, the native doctors are very successful. ir was told 
of two cases well known to the narrator, in one of which an 
Indian ‘had been shot through the back and the centre of the 
* stomach ; in the other, a European had had his arm shattered 
“by the accidental discharge of a gun loaded with buckshot. 
On both occasions cures were effected by the application 
of certain herbs known only to the medicine-men,—who are . 
a sort of masonic brotherhood; consisting of women as well 
as men, and possessed of secrets which are guarded with the 
most scrupulous care,’ 


‘ 


330 FORT PELLY. "OMAP. xk 


December 16th—‘ Heard from Mr. Murray the followin: 
story, relating to the district he had lived in for many years 
of his life. There were two trappers who set out on a 
trapping expedition near the Missouri River, one an Ameri- 
can, the-other a German, and considered the best rifle-shet 
in the country. Having left their horses and goods concealed 
in a hollow, they were one night camping in a roughly made 
log hut, when they were unluckily discovered by a war-party 
of Sioux, who rushed upon them in great force, attempting 
a surprise. The trappers” however were ready, and each 
killed an Indian at the first shot, which caused the rest to 
retreat under cover. - 

__‘ Firing was kept up for some , time, till at last the Sioux, 
haying. lost six men, drew off a short distance and took 

‘The unfortunate trappers or found that their bullets 
were expended, and believing all hope gone resol yed to 
kill themselves, in ordér to escape the tortures they knew the 
Sioux would inflict on them after the loss‘of so many of 
their braves. Accordingly, they set fire to the log hut; with 


the intention of burniug themselves to death, but the Indians, 


at once guessed what was happening, returned to the place/ 
and despatched their victims. 

‘It was the Sioux themselves who related the story, 
adding that a hasty council had already been held behind jhe 


hill and a decision taken to ride. off, when the smoke/and. 
flames rising from the hut revealed the true state of Ahings” 


to their quick perceptions. \ 

‘While returning home, this war -party met two unarmed 
men belonging to an American Fort, and instantly killed 
and scalped them, as a sort of makeweightAor their own 
slain warriors; their conduct, however, was condemned by 


ae ~ 


7 


| 
| 


CHAT. XXI. FORT PELLY. , . . 331 


the Sioux chiefs themselves, who promised the Americans 
that, these murderers should be put to death. Such severe 
measures were promised (whether actually carried out was 
not known), because the offenders had contravened a general 
rule of the tribe—that Europeans living in their country 
or journeying to it should be well treated, and those only 
attacked who were found in an enemy's territory or approach- 
ing to its borders.’ 
Sunday, December 18th.— Service at the old Fort, 

In the afternoon read part of the public controversy, ¢ on 
the Roman Catholic and Protestant question, between Mr. 
F and Dr. C It is painful to observe the scorn 
- and Batred ‘that pervade the whole of this discussion. How 
can men devote so much time to the study of Scripture, 


and fail to discover that such diabolical tempers are far 


more ‘condemned by Christ, than any deviation In matters 
of opinion! The unbelieving Sadducees were tenderly 
- handled, while those punctilious believers, the whited- 
sepulchre Pharisees, were overwhelmed with condemnation. 

‘When will just views of religion prevail in the world, 
and the minds of thinking men be delivered from the 
temptations to sheer infidelity which the puerile narrow- 
ness of most Christian churches and churchmen so continually 
provokes and fosters ?’ 

December 19th.— At 8 P.M. yesterday the thermometer 


stood at 21° below zero, and this morning it was yet 11° 


lower, but the sun came out and made the climate seem 
almost warm. Unless wind is blowing, or circumstances 
oblige one to sit still or ride slowly in the open air, the 
weather feels hardly colder than on an English frosty day. 
‘Went with all the men to hunt beaver in the Assini- 
boine: we were unsuccessful, the animals having left. the 


i 
i 


oe 


332 FORT PELLY. CHAP. XXI. 


place at which they were last seen. We had beaver meat 
at dinner yesterday. It seemed to me rather brown and 
strong, something like wild goose,—inferior to the beaver we 
got from the Iroquois at the River M‘Leod’ 

December 20th.—‘ A mild morning: 5° degrees below 
zero, about 11 AM. Heard for the first time that an expedi- 
tion is on foot for marking the boundary between British 
America and the United States. -The new-fashioned custom 
of running boundary lines on parallels of latitude or longitude 
is veryansatisfactory ; it seems far better to put rivers, lakes, 
and mountains, to their natural use of dividing territories, so 
that a real instead of a fictitious boundary is obtained. 

‘Ere another century has passed, the Columbia and South 
Saskatchewan rivers and Winipeg Lake may possibly enough 
take the place of the 48th parallel as the national frontier ; 


the Americans possessing Red River and that central land . 


whose direct communications run through the States, while 
Britaih possesses two powerful colonies on the eastern and 
western oceans, and retains that vast fur-bearing territory 
of the north, which, being unfit for settlement, will require 
no greater facilities of access than at present belong to it 
in its water communication with Hudson’s Bay. 

‘ Along the North Saskatchewan might be formed a chain 


of settlements sufficiently strong to protect the frontier, 3 


maintain communication between Columbia and Canada, and 
provide means for carrying on such government as the thinly 
populated northern districts might require. If a Pacific 
railway were deemed necessary, this appears to me to be 
the best—~perhaps the only feasible—line, as one more 
southern must pass through hundreds of miles of barren 


prairie, incapable of growing crops or timber, and ‘searcely 
. suitable even for grazing purposes.’ 


# ; 


any 


CHAP, XXI. FORT PELLY.  . > 833 


(‘Since writing the above I have seen a map by Mr. 
Dawson, who surveyed part of the country in the interests 
of Canada, and I find it to be his opinion, also, that Lake ~~ 
Winipeg and the North Saskatchewan are the true lines for 
Pacific- communication, the route he lays down being identical 
with that which. suggested itself to me’) [Journal-note 
added soon afterwards at Fort Garry. See Hinpj—Can. 
Ex. Exped., vol. li. p. 222, e¢ seq.] 

December 23¢-—‘ Shot a rabbit with my rifle. These 
animals are more like small hares than rabbits; in summer 


‘ they are brownish grey, in winter white, with brown ears.’ * 


December 24th.— Saw my horses for the last time,’ 

“Sungey, December 25th, Christmas Day—‘ Communion 
service at the old Fort. Two Indians were present, and Mr. 
Settee addressed them in. their own language when giving 
them the bread and wine,’ 


* See p. 265. 


CHAPTER XXII. -  *™ 


FORT PELLY TO FORT GARRY. _. 


DECEMBER 27th——We had at last collected a sufficient 
number of dogs to draw my own cariole* and three sleds 
laden with goods and provisions, but these being too few 
for the transport of all our property, I settled that M‘Kay and 
Short should wait at Fort Pelly till the arrival of more dogs 
enabled them to bring on the remaining baggage. Kline, in 
M‘Kay’s absence, was to take the place of the latter ag’guide to | 
the party, which now consisted of my old hands—M'‘Beath, 
Matheson, Duncan, and Toma, with the addition of two’ or 
three.men belonging to the Fort and its neighbourhood. - 
Jt was late in the afternoon when we left Fort Pelly, intend- 
ing no longer distance than would ensure us an early start 
next morning, but we marched so well as to make out-eighit 
miles before halting to encamp at the accustomed hour. 
December 28th.—Nothing remarkable took place, except 
an unlucky accident to M‘Beath, who injured his foot by 
dropping -on it an unopened bag of pemmican, weighing 
90 lb, and as hard as a block.of stone: as he seemed half 
* “ A cariole is constructed of a very thin board, 10 feet long and 12 or 14 
inches broad, turned up at one end in the form of half a circle, like the bend 
of an Ojibway ince. To this board a high cradle like the body of a small 
carriage [more like‘a coffin or a slipper-bath, in my opinion] is attached, about 
18 inches from the end of the board or floor. The framework is covered with 


buffalo-skin parchment, and painted or decorated according to taste.” Hrxp, 
—Can. Ex, Exped.; vol. ii. p. 84. 


t 


L 


"De pe 
_ and marched in two hovts afterwards,’ 


a 


4 


e 


CHAP. XXII. FORT PELLY TO FORT GARRY. 335 


crippled I put. him into my cariole, and walked all fU rest 
of our seventeen-mile march.. 
December 29th.<-Awakened between ‘3 and 4 o’clock by 
the jingling of bells, and other soundsf an arriving traveller. 
_ It proved to be Mr. M'Beath, an office the C Company’s 
service, proceeding on his journey from Dakar to one of 
-the western Forts. - 4 
[He was uncle ie my man Morrison M‘Beath—they had 
not met for years. TW recently Mr. M‘Beath had been in 
ewharge of a very remote post near the Mackenzie River, 
having stayed Gf I rightly remember) fifteen years in that 
“‘ecolate locality. He told me that in mid-winter, when the 
days are at their shortest,-the sun was only visible there for 
a quarter of an hour,—rising suddenly above horizon, 
traversing a short, low: are, then ‘sinking into utter 
We breakfasted together, and at parting Mr. M' 
obligingly consented to lend us one of his dogs. He also lent 
me 2 pair of very neat light snow-shoes. I at once put 
‘them on, and walked twelve miles’ without a halt: but this © 


" wag severe work, and I was glad to’ get into the cariole after 


dinner, MBeath’s foot being now, nearly well. 
Finding the other snow-shoes too heavy, Kline made 


, . & . ‘ 

himself a smaller pair- from bent willow \ er 

wands; crossed with slips of leather; they-~ — pt > 
~* rt 


_ were oval in shape and perfectly ‘flat, and 


seemed to be both light and strong. Our. 
march to-day was about twenty-two miles. /o~ 


“Up by 1.15 am, 


KLINE’S SNOW “SHOES. 


[Contrary to the usual custom I always Yreakfasted before 
setting out in the morning, instead of waiting for that meal 
till part of the march had been accomplished, or postponing ~ 
it till dinner-time at noon. 4 


reg . - : 
336 FORT PELLY | CHAP. XXM. 


This plan added much to the comfort of travelling, and 
seldom led to serious delay, though on the present occasion 
it rather appears to have done so.] 

‘Walked for some time during the afternoon, but found . 
my left heel,—sprained in the deep snow near Touchwood 
Hills,—growing very painful. The rodd ran mostly through 
poplar-brush, but latterly through willows and swamps. _ 
Cold, clear day, Distance about 25 miles’ 

{ft got excessively cold towards‘evening, in proof of © 
which I recollect one singular circumstance :—I was reading 

.at my tent door, seated on a camp stool’ as close as possible 
to an enormous fire of logs, a good yard high at least. 
While so close to this blazing furnace that my cloth leggings 

- were scorching, as usual, into holes——though some regard for 

their safety regulated one’s distance from the fire more than 
anything else,—the wind struck so cold on the side-of my 
face, that tears kept dropping from eyes nd nose upon 
the book before me, and each drop instantaneously froze 
where it fell. I fancy that the work of these small icicles 
may still be traced in certain marks and indentations on 
the’ pages of “ Othello,” the play I was reading that night.*] 

December 31st—-We marched at 4.30 a.st,- and just 
before sunrise crossed Swan Lake, where it has a width of 
about twelve miles. The ice was rough, and jolted the 
cariole violently: the cold was terrible. . In hopes of warming 
myself I got out to walk—in a minute or two I was 
stopped by. Taylor, the driver of my own team, who began 
rubbing my nose, which he declared was frost-bitten. 

This was.a very bleak and miserable part of the journey, 
but afterwards our track led us into more genial regions, 
where woods of pine sparingly mingled with small larches 
formed a certain shelter, and though we traversed several 


* See Appendix. 


cHAP. xxif | TO FORT GARRY. 337 


other lakes, they were too narrow to be much affected by the 
keen north-easterly wind. 

[How well do I remember the encampment in which we 
saw the old year buried and the new year born! Tall pine 
trees encompassed us with their rugged stems, and canopied 
the whole ground, save the small space that held us, with 
their vast spreading branches, all thickly covered with 
masses of the softest, purest snow. Our camp-fire, once 
more built up with fragrant pine instead of the dull poplar 
logs, blazed gloriougly and sparkled, and threw out a delicious 
odour, while its light illumined the stately trees around, 
and endowed with pleasant looks of home and sheltering 
warmth those solemn, snow-laden, mysterious forest-forms 
that hemmed us in so closely ‘and so still. 

. Even thus, the glow of hope and the light of contentment 
irradiated -the melancholy snow-thoughts of the’ departing 
year, and turned them into brightness as a welcome for the 
year to come.] akan Le 

1860. Sunday Y, January 1st,—‘ Our road was vey 
rough at starting, through young pine woods full of “ 
barras” which jolted the cariole severely, and repeatedly 
upset it. In the afternoon we came to Lake Winnepagos. | 
The ice was smooth and we pushed along at a rapid pace. 

~*My team consists of three middle-sizel ‘Indian dogs, 
sharp-nosed, bushy-haired and wolfish. Chocolat, the leader, 
is dark red; Casse-toute, grey, shaded with black; and Fox, 
reddish fawn-colour. The driver is a particularly smart and 
active man; he can run for miles behind the cariole while 
the dogs are galloping, encouraging them all the time with 
incessant volleys of abuse in a mixture of English, French, 
and Indian. 

‘(Vociferously) Fox! Fox! ah, crapaud Fox! (Scream- 


338 - FORT PELLY CHAP, XXII. 


ingly)-Faux ! sacré démon! (Warningly) Fox, ye ould sinner, 
pren’ garde: crapaud that ye aire. - (Surprised) Chécolat! 
(Very distinctly and syNabically) Chéc-d-l4t,—michdstim !* 
—~Yéu-oh! yéu-oh! [to the right}]:—-cha! cha! [to the left]. 
(Parenthetically) Ah, Chocolat, you wééll catch it presently. 
(Indignantly and suddenly) Casse-toute: ab,_ sal-au-prix ! 


' (Shriekingly) Casse-toute !! (Contemptuously) maiivais chien! 


(Despairingly—as if calling to a dog in the sky) Fox! Fox! 
Fitix! Then a burst of unintelligible Indian rough words, 
followed by a hasty, furious shout to the whole team—Fox! 
Casse- toute! Chocolat! cré démons !—vunder cover of 


which he rushes past_the cariole, shaking his whip, while 


the wretched dogs dart side to side in agonies of fear, 
whining, squealing, - and shrieking, like a drove of dis- 
tracted pigs. ° 

‘The next team is,drawn by a‘red-coloured Indian leader, 
in front of two large noble-looking Canadian dogs, white with 


- yellow and black-marks, short-haired but rough, resembling 


some of the St. Bernard mastiffs. -With this team the great 
trouble is to get the first start made. The driver is a man 
of more.blows than words, and at each departure one hears 
a harsh voice ery out——“ Survellon,t marche! Passe-partout, 


marche !”-—immediately answered by deep-toned ‘yells from 
the cowering, crouching hounds; then comes a fearful crack- 


_ing and thumping, and the poor beasts at last set off with 


their heavy load, howling as if their hearts would break. 
‘The cruelty with which dogs are treated here cannot be 
excused. - Doubtless they are often obstinate and provoking, | 
and require severe floggings,—especially from a new driver, 
* Michastim, Michastemue—bad dog, bad dogs: the nearest approach to 

swearing, I am told, that the Indian language admits of. (Journal-note.) 


+ So the name was pronounced, Was Surreillané the word, or was il 
Cerf-colant,—-or Cerf-vola, asin Captain Butler's recently published work ¢ 


Xu 


. A 


—_— = ers } 
{ 


GUAR. XXII. TO FORT GARRY. _ 339 


till he has brought his team into subjection—but when one 
sees poor helpless animals, who are ‘tindergoing extreme 
labour in the trains, not merely beaten on the body with 
heavy lashes hut systematically flogged on the head till their 
ears\drip blood; and not merely this, but beaten with whip- 
handles till” their, jaws and noses are cut open with deep 
wounds ; and, not merely this, but cudgelled with clubs, 
and knelt‘upon and stamped upon till their howls turn to 
low groans of -agony——this I say is enough to call down 
. vengeafice on -the land. 

‘Worse cruelties even than these I have heard of,—I 
record what I have seen; and should blush to record it 
if I had not done my best to stop such hellish practices. 

‘The strange thing: is, that men who are full of kindness 
and humanity towards one another and towards the rest of 
creation, should be as bad as the greatest ruffians in their 
treatment of the poor dogs—those most useful slaves who 
will work day and night, almost without a rest, for weeks 
together. But for them, there would be no means of travel- 
ling during the many months of snow, which no thaw removes 
till melted by the strengthened sun in April’ 

[There is no after-colouring in these paragraphs, which are 
copied all but word for word from my journal. Yet, on looking 
back; my remarks seem to me too sweeping and unqualified.* 
The driver of the Canadian team treated his dogs with 
fearful brutality, but I cannot believe that the other men 
went nearly to such lengths as he did. My own cariole driver, 
an excellent hand, could not have done the worst things 


* Since this was written, I have found in Captain Butler’s work,—TZhe 
Great Lone Land,—-details of atrocities quite as great committed on wretched 
sleigh-dogs by their drivers, —just ten years subsequently to the date of my 


own experiences. 


ae 


“3100 FORT PELLY CHAP, xo 


yeferred fo—I should have stopped him. As far as “I 


“Si. remember he was a good-natured fellow, and knew how to 


make words do duty for blows. 

Of the remaining teams,—one was driven by a Red River 
man, who being new- to the work began too leniently, and 
had to make up for it with a harshness very foreign to his 
nature. J remember nothing as to the driver of a team 
borrowed’ at Duck Bay, nor about the driver of the other 
Fort Pelly team. If the latter was Kline, my subsequent 
acquaintance with his driving convinces me that he was far 
from cruel to his dogs, reasonable allowance being made. 

I probably rather generalised, to avoid pointing too 
plainly at an individual case,—but no one ought to bear 
another’s blame, and J should indeed be sorry to subject my 
excellent Fort Garry men to the tisk of unjust reproach. 
All said, it remains that the dogs are treated very brutally, 
and- that even the kindest men are needlessly cruel. Not 
one of the drivers but made a practice of striking his dogs 
on the head, till I interfered——and sometimes after that. 

I happened to hear what passed when Kline gave my 
message to the drivers, forbidding further cruelty. They 
could hardly take in the idea. “ Not to beat our dogs ?»—they 
asked in tones of astonishment: “Beat them—yes,” said 
Kline, “you may do that, but you are not to hammer them 
about the head.” - 

‘At 3 P.M. we reached Duck Bay, on Lake Winnepagos, 
where the Company have just established a small post. The 
house has been hurriedly built of logs danbed with clay, and 


” consists of two rooms, or rather of one room divided into two 


by a rude partition of boards with wide openings between 
their unplaned joints ; but;in spite of the roughness of the. 
plan, it is warm,—-as all buildings of the kind seem to be, 


7 


CHAP, XXU. TO FORT GARRY, 34] 


contrasting favourably with the cottages of Scotch or English 
labourers. The clay chimneys, moreover, never smoke, and 
have a famous draught, perhaps owing to a bend near’ the 
top, with which they are generally made’, 

January 2d.—' We marched about noon, and crossed over 
to the eastern side of the lake.’ There was a high north 


wind, which filled the air with clouds of fine powdery snow 


drifting before the blast, and we were glad to camp about 
four o’clock in a sheltered place among some poplars. 
Having opened a hole in the icéxyith our axes, we found it 
to be three feet thick’ [When the last layer of ice was 
penetrated, though only by a trifling cut, the water rushed 
into our funnel-shaped excavation, and instantly filled it to 
the brim.] 

January 3d—‘ Camped about four o'clock on the neck 
of Jand between Winnepagos .and Manitobih lakes. The 
wind was very high in the morning, but went down towards 
sunset, and our camp was unusually comfortable. 

‘The shores of Winnepagos are flat, and densely wooded 
with small poplars of the common kind. They are much 
indented with bays, which ‘we traversed in a straight course, 


' passing over the low swampy promontories in the same 


manner, 

January 4th.—‘Marched at five aM., and crossed the ; 
neck of land, which seems to be about four miles wide, and 
rises near the centre into hilly ground covered with rather 
large elm trees. ° 

‘There appear to be inlets of swamp from both lakes, 
which might perhaps be connected and formed into a canal 
if much traffic began to pass this way,—as before very long 
is likely enough to happen. Darkness, however, and want 


of time, prevented any v examination of the place. 


| a 


342 FORT PELLY CHAP, XXII. 


‘Boats at present pass between the two lakes by a very 
circuitous route, going along the Water Hen River, a stream 
connected with the south-east corner of Winnepagos and the 
north-east. corner of Manitobah, by branches, each of which 
extends nearly due north, for a number of miles, till it 
reaches a small lake where they both terminate. 

‘On the neck of Jand a Saulteaux Indian was put to 
death last year under singular circumstances. Being affected 
with some sort of madness he spoke to no one, and appa- 
rently ate nothing for a month. His tribe took the idea that 
he was a cannibal, and after wounding him severely buried 
him before life was extinct. Many hours afterwards the 
unhappy wretch was heard moving in his grave, so they dug 
him up and burned him to ashes. . 

“A few years ‘ago a Roman Catholic priest was killed 
_ near this place by the same tribe. Persuaded by his ex- 
hortations during a previous visit, the Indians had allowed 
him to baptize all their children. An epidemic broke out 
soon afterwards, destroying most of these infants, and the 
superstitious savages attributed their loss to the mystic rites 
of the Church. Ignorant of what had happened, the priest 
after a while returned to his flock in the wilderness, but, 
instead of welcomes, these lost sheep received their shepherd 
with. blows, and added him to the company of martyrs. 

‘We made along march to-day, camping towards dusk 
near the mouth of the Crane River. 

‘The ice of Manitobah lake is smoother than that of 
Winnepagos, which, I am told, is always the case, though - 
there is no apparent reason for it, the shores of both being 
similar—low, woody, and indented with bays. 

‘Lake travelling, though rapid, is exceedingly disagreeable. 
High winds are perpetually sweeping over the immense plain 


7 


CHAP. XXUL TO FORT GARRY, 343 


of their frozen surface, intensifying even moderate cold to 
a painful.degree; the’ice is uneven, crusted with snow of 
varying thickness, and drifted into hillocks and ridges which 
are constantly upsetting the cariole,—a\trifling matter on 
shore, but extremely unpleasant here, where the hardness of 
the ice nearly breaks one’s bones. 

- ‘This same hardness doubles the fatigue of cariole 
journeying, which may then be likened to sitting on a thin 
plank, dragged quickly over bad granite causeway. Often. 
were Tom Hood’s lines in my mind— “ 


“* Over the stones rattle his bones, 
He’s only a pauper that nobody owns.” 


‘Walking or running on a frozen Jake has also peculiar 
disadvantages. Where the snow lies deeply the crust 
gives way at each step, where it is shallow or drifted away 
the hardness of the.ice injures even the practised yoyageurs, 
causing swellings of the ankles and soles of the feet, and 
enlargement of the lower back-sinews of the legs. 

‘ There is another annoyance in winter travelling. From 
what cause I know not, very slight exercise occasions pro- 
fuse perspiration, which in the most momentary halt gets 
cold upon the skin; indeed, in high wind, the exposed -side 
will be cold and clammy, while the rest of the body is 
melting with heat ;—no harm, however, follows these sudden 
changes, -which in a less healthy country would serve to kil 
a rhinoceros. 

‘At dinner-time we met a man named Le Rond, one of the 
free traders who press the Company so hard in this quarter. 
He was travelling alone, with a lightly laden dog-sled, con- 
taining articles of barter and such furs as he had been able 
to secure. During summer he-went with Sir Francis Sykes 


~ 


B44 FORT PELLY CHAP, XXII. 


and his party to the Turtle Mountain, where they seem to 
have had good sport, killing buffalo, all sorts of deer, and 
two brown bears. 

January 5th-—‘ A severe day’s journey. Getting up at 
2 AM. and breakfasting, we were off by 4, and, continuing 
on the western side of the’ lake, traversed a wide bay 
in face of a very high, intensely cold wind. So great was 
the drift that it obscured the little light afforded by. moon 
and stars through a cloudy atmosphere, and I became much_. 
afraid that some of the party would get lost, especially . 
those who had walked forward an hour before the sledges 
started. It grieved me that -the men “should be exposed 
to such a storm while I had shelter in the cariole; but I 
could do nothing .to help them, so putting other cares aside 
I strove to make mysélf comfortable. ~ 

‘Vain task! Though I buried myself head and all in 
two robes and a blanket, the wind found its way through 
everything, and I suspect that the mastef, sitting still in his 
wraps, suffered more from cold than his men who were 
running against the bitter hurricane, and suffered besides 


under the depressing sense of his idle helplessness, while ae 


they felt the cheering influences of hardy toil. . - 

‘I hate cariole travelling It is humiliating to be 
dragged about in a portable bed, like some sick woman, 
while the active voyageurs are maintaining their steady 
ran for hours,—for days,—for weeks, I daresay, if you 
required it—for fatigue seems with them an unknown 
word. 

‘ Nevertheless, what must be must, and as, from various 
causes, I found myself unable to run for more than a few 
hours at a time, I was obliged to submit to the luxurious 
degradation that my very soul abhorred. How different 


oa > \ 


CHAP, XXIt. TO. FORT GARRY. 345 


from the days, when on my good horse’s back I rode rifle 
in hand, free and confident, equal to any man, and ready 
for anything! 

“We reached Manitobah Fort about six o'clock, and 
were hospitably received by Mr. Mackenzié, the officer in 
charge. This post is built on the western shore of the 
lake, and consists of a small dwelling-house and some 
scattered cottages. The lake is very narrow here, so con- 
-tracted, indeed, that its upper and lower divisions are some- 
times, but improperly, treated as separate, and called by 
different names. 

‘The word Manitobah—pronounced Manito-bah, with a 
strong accent on the last syllable—signifies “Spirit” or 


“Demon” Lake, a name said to originate in ‘the existence — 


of a small extent of never-frozen water, which is supposed 
to be kept open by some supernatural being. Winnepaigos (as 
- [heard it pronounced, it is spelt in many ways) means, I am 
told, the same as Winnepeg (the name of the far larger lake 
into which the Red River flows), the word in both cases 
signifying muddy water. 

‘Winnepagos and Manitobah are similar in size, their 
length being about 130 miles, and their general breadth 
about 30. When on either of these lakes, except in a single 
place towards the southern extremity of the latter, both 
the shores are visible at a time, even if you are travelling 
close to the side. . 

‘The water of Manitobah is clear, that of Winnepagos 
muddy, and in some parts brackish. Considerable quantities 
of salt are manufactured at these places, and the saline 
influence is so great there that the water sometimes hardly 
freezes, and travellers are accustomed. to make a long round 


to avoid risking # sudden plunge, through the ice.’ 3 


346 FORT PELLY _o CHAP, XXII. 


January 6th— Left the Fort at 10 a.m., after exchang- 
ing the Duck Bay train for another. It was a pleasant day; 
we crossed over-to the other side of the lake, and marched 
without any halt till near 10. o'clock at night, when we 
arrived at the house of Mr. James Monkman, an English 
half-breed, who has a small farm, and a fishery which pro- 
duces the finest white-fish of the district. 

‘The house is srsall, and contains only two rooms, one 
of which we expected to find empty, but unluckily it had 
been lately let, and was full of women and children. Mr. 
Monkman, however, insisted on receiving us all, and some- 
how or other the whole party found accommodation. 

‘The night was mild, but our kind host, supposing us to 
be chilly, heaped piles of wood on the fire, and in a few 
rojnutes the heat became suffocating. The cottage, built of 
massive , logs plastered with mud,’ and lighted by firmly 
fixed parchment windows, admitted no communication with 
. the outer air, the small low-ceilinged room was occupied by 
four men, two women, several boys, and about half-a-dozen 
children of different ages—-I found myself gasping for 
breath. . ; 

, ‘We sat down to supper; my host and I in equal suffering, 
but neither complaining, for each supposed the heat pleasant 
to the other, and so we began to drink hot tea. Ere long 
great drops of perspiration streaming from our brows drove 
us to our pocket handkerchiefs and revealed the true state 
of the case :—simultaneously we rose and opened the door 
—oh! -what a relief’ 

Mr. Monkman was much interested in hearing an account 
of our wanderings, and in return gave me a gaod deal of 
European information gathered from newspapers I had not 
seen ; so—apart from the short purgatory of fire—we passed 


e 


CHAP. XXII. TO FORT GARRY. 347 


a very agreeable evening, succeeded by a good night’s rest, 
‘notwithstanding the crowded state of the room. 

January Tth-—~ Off about 9 o'clock. The track (now 
along the eastern shore) runs for some distance on the ice, 
' passes Oak Point, and finally leaves the lake at the south- 
east corner, a position occupied by a Roman Catholic mission- 
house and chapel. 

‘Wasting no time there, I went on to a wood two 
miles farther on the way and halted for dinner; when, much 
to my surprise and displeasure, I discovered that some of the 
men had chosen to stop at the mission to rest and smoke in 
the priest’s house, and it cost both time and trouble to bring 
them away from their comfortable quarters.’ [The offenders 
were men hired for the job at one or other of the Forts; 
undisciplined fellows, careless about pleasing, though till then 

‘there had been no particular fault to find with them. I had 
only one day more of their services. ] 

‘After the whole were come up, I found that the less 
experienced travellers were too tired or footsore to go on to 
White Horse Plains that night, so leaving them to camp 


where they were, I set out at 6 P.M. with the cariole, and. 


one sled, driven respectively by Taylor and Kline. 

‘We got to the settlement on the “ Ridge” between 9 and 
10, stopped a few minutes at a French half-breed’s house, 
and then proceeded. The proper track*had not been opened, 
. 80 we were compelled to go many miles round. 

‘The distance séemed interminable. Hours followed 
hours, the dogs got much fatigued, and I began to feel very 
stiff and sore from lying so long in a jolting box, where one 
has hardly room to move hand or foot; but still my men 
. pushed on at a steady pace, and at last, at a quarter past 3 


ty 
~ 


‘esy 


348 FORT PELLY | CHAP, XXIL 


in the morning, we entered the F ort,—-where tea and other 
hot liquids refreshed us after our sixteen hours’ journey.’ 
[Sixteen hours of actual work I suppose, for we were eighteen , 
hours on the way between Monkman’s andy White Horse 
Plains. Our usual dinner halt. was two hours.] 

Sunday, January 8th.— Féwid my men-all fresh and 
ready. The hardy Kline'had not even troubled to go to 
bed, preferring to amuse himself in visiting his-friends. 

‘Shortly after starting we passed the Roman Catholic 
church, just as the congregation was coming out. There 
seemed to be about two hundred people, mostly men,- and 
more or less of Frendh-Canadian blood. They have one 
_ almost invariable type of dress, which, though handsome in 
, itself, looks rather sombre in a erowd,—capots of dark blue, 
leggings of the same, caps either of the same or of some 
dark fur. The only relief to this monotony is given by a 
scarlet, crimson, or variegated scarf round the waist, and red 
stripes émbroidered with various coloured ribbons down the 
~ outside of the leggings. The female costume is generally dark 
also, and not remarkable, though with much picturesqueness 
about the head-dress, which is sometimes a dark shaw] or. 
blanket worn as a hood, sometimes a crimson or yellow silk 
handkerchief, which forms a rich contrast to the glossy black 
hair it partly conceals. ; 

‘The Fort of White House Plaing is situated near the | 
Assiniboine, and the settlement extends itself along the 
banks of that river. For twenty miles, almost without a 
break, small farms run autwards from the river-side into the 
uncultivated but grass-clad prairies. The soil seems rich, a 
belt of large, fine elm-trees borders the course of the stream, 
and young poplars grow in masses here and there; the 


2 
v 


a, 


CHAP. XXII. _ ‘TO FORT GARRY, \ 349 


gtound ungdulates-considerably in many parts, and altogether 
this settlement looks warmer and more home- like than that 
on the Red River near Fort Garry. oo. 

‘The settlers’ houses are generally plain square boxes, 
devoid of the smallest attempt at ornament; without a 
chimney even, unless a short projecting iron stove-pipe may 
be called so. Wood is the material invariably employed,— 
placed horizontally in long logs about a foot square. Neither 
gardens nor surrounding fences are in favour, and the - 
cottages stand .all raverand bare-faced, as boulders are strewn 
by a flood, or ’ meteor-étonts dropped from the sky. 

‘Near Fort Garry there fre better buildings than ‘these, 
but incomparably the “prettiest house in the district is one 
lately put up by Mr. Rowand, at Sturgeon Creek. Standing 
om rising ground, and backed by a wood of poplars, this 
cottage looks southwards to the sun, and commands a 
pleasant rural view of wooded slopes and many distant 
homesteads. Enclosing the principal floor,—which is raised 
on a low basement storey,—-and surrounding three sides of 
the house, runs a wide covered verandah, gaily painted and 
quaintly formed; while, above, the steepness of the shingle 
toof is broken by numerous dormer windows, like a flock of 
sheep reposing on a sunny bank. A garden, reached by | 
stéps from the verandah, and some neatly enclosed grass 
fields. diversified with skilfully arranged transplanted trees, 
frame in a picture ‘whose equal I am persuaded will not 
easily be found in British Central America.’ 

A short distance from this pretty place I met my old 
friend James M‘Kay, driving by himself in a horse cariole. 
' He begged me to take my place beside him,—determined to 
forward me on my road, though his own lay in the opposite 


“ 


350. FORT PELLY TO FORT GARRY. HAY. XI. 
: 


direction—then stirring up his horse he speedily brought 
me to Fort Garry——which I reached that afternoon after an 
absence of nearly seven months. , 
Letters from home. . ... It was in.June that I 
{ received the last. , 


RED RIVER PIRE-BAG. 


‘A 


CHAPTER XXIIL 


FORT GARRY. 


‘ 


JANUARY 9th—I was so glad to find myself amidst 
the comforts of Fort Garry, and the society of old friends | 
and acquaintances, as almost to feel pleasure in discovering 
that I should be some time detained there-—waiting the 
arrival of M‘Kay and Short from Fort Pelly, winding up 
accounts for the past journey, and arranging for the journey 
that remained before stages and railway-cars were available. 

My first day: was passed in that absolute idleness which 
is only agreeable after such hard work as I had lately under- 
gone—and for which one is greatly inclined under'such’ cir- 
cumstances;—a purely animal existence of rest and warmth 
and food. 

On the following day (January 10th) I walked to 
Bishop’s Court, the Episcopal residence, having received 
an invitation from the BiShop of Rupert’s Land; this place 
is about three miles distant from the Fort, going down 
stream in the direction of Lake Winnipeg. It was horribly 
_ cold weather; so keen was the high south-westerly wind, 
that, on returning, though I ran most of the way, my nose 
was again slightly frost bitten. 

[This is the feature which cannot be protected, for 
coverings do not answer where the breath freezes instan- 
taneously into solid lumps of ice] ; 

' ©A newspaper, called “The Nor’ Wester,” has just been 


- 


352 FORT GARRY. CHAP, XXIII. 


established, its first number, the first that ever appeared in 
the settlement, having come out with the New Year.’ [Thus 
it was my fortune to witness the’ appearance of the first 
steainboat and the first newspaper in this remote part of 
the world.] ‘It is conducted by two editors from Canada, 
who, without assistance, carry on the entire business, me- 
chanical as well as intellectual. Mr. Caldwell, one of these 
gentlemen, called on’ me and obtained the outline of my 
journey, whick excites some interest here. There is a good 
deal to fill a newspaper in this settlement, for besides other 
things, there are many ecclesiastical and judicial matters to 
- record, in a place possesséd of two bishops and a numerous 
clergy, a governor, and various courts in continual ‘employ.’ 
The strictness with which the laws are administered 
has led to many prosecutions. No spirituous liquors, for 
example, may be sold without a license, which costs £10 
sterling, even the Company submitting to the same rule, 
and paying all customs like the ordinary traders. A breach: 
of this law involves a penalty of £10,—half going to the 
informer and half to the ‘public funds,—but, nevertheless; * 
transgressions and convictions are constantly taking place. 
January 11th.‘ After a visit to the Roman Catholic 
Bishop of St. Boniface, whom I found preparing for a short 
journey to Pembina and its neighbourhood, I went to a 
meeting summoned by the Bishop of Rupert's Land for 
the purposes of drawing attention to the recent religious 
revivals in the United States, Ireland, and elsewhere, and 
of praying for an outpouring of God’s spirit on this country 
likewise. 

‘The meeting was held in the schoolroom, and was 
attended by about one hundred and fifty persons, chiefly 
belonging to the Scottish part of the community. The 


CHAP, XXIII FORT GARRY. 353 


Bishop presided, supported by Archdeacon Hunter, the Rev. 
Mr. Chapman, the Rev. Mr. Cowley, and the Rev. Mr. Black 
(the Presbyterian minister), all of whom successively de- 
livered addresses relating to the sudden progress of religion 
in various places, and offered up short prayers for similar 
manifestations among their own people. 

‘These prayers and addresses were listened to with 
earnest, quiet attention, and a devout spirit seemed to pervade 
the assemblage, but there was no appearance of excitement 
or any strong emotion. 

‘In his opening speech- the Bishop referrel to my 
journey, and especially to my communications ‘with the 
Christian Assiniboines of Bow River, and with kind autho- 
rity insisted on my addressing the meeting. This caused 
me some embarrassment, for though sincerely anxious * for 
the spread of religion, and satisfied that more good than evil 
generally results from revivals, I have the utmost horror of 
those insane excitements which too often ‘accompany them, 
and seem more worthy of demoniacs than of devout Chris- 
_ tians or humble penitents. 

‘To avoid acting as an inverted Balaam—brought in 
to bless and cursing “ altogether ”-—was difficult, but life is 
full of such difficulties to men who are not partizans,—-Gallios, 
Gamaliels, Laodicéans, or citizens of Meroz, according to 
one party; Korahs and Dathans, Jeroboams, Diotrepheses, 
Sadducees, according to the other. To bring discord into a 
special meeting is an indiscretion; to misrepresent one’s 
belief is a crime. Remembering this, and striving to avoid 
offence on either side, I began. After a few sentences in 
reference to the Bishop’s remarks, I gave some details of the 
religious movement in Scotland, praising the good I knew to 
‘have been effected by such means. I then proceeded to say, 

2A : 


354 FORT GARRY. CHAP, XXII. 


that the leading newspapers,—whose hostility to revivals 


had just been severely commented on,—were far too shrewd 
to run counter to the opinion of the majority of the educated 
classes, and, this admitted, that it was only fair to suppose 
that evils accompanied those widéspread fervours, which 
ought not to be charged against religion itself, nay, which 
sprang from tendencies directly opposed ta the principles of 
the New Testament. 

‘Two principal sources of error I thought might be 
discovered. The first,— that ordinary selfish habit which 


leads men to look inwards instead of outwards, inducing _ 


them to agonies of horror at the weakness and wickedness 
of their own hearts and at Satan’s strength, and of terror at 
the thought of Divine vengeance, thus often causing fearful 
‘ paroxysms expressed in convulsive words and acts; whereas 
the penitent ought to look outwards towards God, with 
absolute confidence in His love and assurances of pardon, 
' considerations which lead to holy calm, not to howls and 
cries, weepings, and wailings and teeth-gnashings, only suit- 
able to Hell. 
‘The second,— the common tendency to make religion 
‘a thing by itself, quite distinct from daily life; 3. So that 
a man will impatiently leave his honest labour in | order 
to begin some devotional exercises, instead of remembering 
that all acts ought to be so consecrated to religion that the 
meanest occupation becomes a holy sacrifice to God :— 
even as George Berber} says—speaking of doing all to God’s 


glory— - ee 
. ~ ee - ? 
i 1 A servant with this claitse, - 5 
oN Makes drudgery divine : : 


Who sweeps a room as for thy laws 
Makes that, and the action, fine.”—(The Elizir, ver. 5.) 


CHAP. XXMT, FORT GARRY, 355 


Erroneous views in this respect cause religion to seem 
gloomy, selfish, and ridiculous; the irrelicious are made hostile, 
and the waverers become indifferent. 

‘These remarks of mine (of which I only give the sub- 
stance, having been called on for a speech unawares) seemed 
to be approved of, but I doubt if their tendency was at all 
generally understood. 

{The Bishop was good enough’ to claim me as a brother- 
missionary on account of the passages of Scripture I had 
written out for the Assiniboines, who had been represented 
to me as ignorant of all but the outlines of Christianity, long 
isolated from teachers, and anxious for further religious 
guidance. 

‘A newspaper paragraph (adapted from the No’ Wester) 
relative to this subject, was afterwards forwarded to me by 
the Rev. Mr: Woolsey (the Wesleyan missionary I had ‘the 
pleasure of meeting at Fort Edmonton) with a letter which 
opened my eyes to the mistake I had been led into,—pro- 
bably through misunderstanding on the part of John M‘Kay, 
who being but imperfectly enabled to communicate with the 
Assiniboines, had perhaps exaggerated some remark about 
their distance from teachers and desire for further_instruc- 
tion. Of hypocrisy or deceitfulness I entirely acquit these - 
poor and honest Indians, nor can I doubt that M‘Kay, as 
usual, interpreted to the best of his power. 

Mr. Woolsey’s letter is so interesting that I have been 
unable to resist quoting much more from it than the short 
extra¢t which mere justice requires: under all the circum-. 
stances, I trust he will pardon me for doing so without 
obtaining his previous sanction. The letter referred to will 
be found in the Appendix. 

January 13th—‘ The funeral of poor Mr. “Mackenzie 


356 FORT GARRY.  onap. xan 


took place to-day. He was in charge at Pembina when I 
passed in May, and afterwards at the new station at Buffalo 
liver, half-way to Crow-wing. . 

‘Some days ago he left that post, having to take charge 
of a party for Fort Garry. Provisions ran short soon after 
their departure, so he volunteered to go on alone to Pembina, 
about forty miles distant, to get assistance. Expecting to 
arrive there in one day,he took little with him, neither axe nor 
bedding, only a small piece of pemmican and a few matches. 
The weather was severe and a snowstorm came on; after 
walking some twenty miles he lost the track, and wandered 
helplessly in the woods for three days. A party on their 
way from Fort Garry found him lying dead, hard frozen. 
Apparently he had been aware of his approaching fate, and’ 
had calmly laid himself down to meet it, placing a pine 
branch under his head for a pillow. Thus died a man ex- 
perienced in travelling, one born and bred in the settlement ; 
—a sad proof of the danger of a solitary journey during 
_ Winter in this terribly rigorous climate. 

' ©The funeral was well attended, the deceased having 
many relations and many friends. After a short address 
from the Bishop, ‘the coffin was removed from its temporary 
resting-place; then, followed by a long line of mourners, 
it was borne sixteen miles to a burying-ground near the 
Lower Fort.’ 

Sunday, Januery 15th—— Trifling snow showers in the 
morning, but the weather continued mild. There was a 
sudden change in that direction on Friday, and at noon 
yesterday the thermometer was 8° above freezing point. 
Everyone agreed in informing me that this had been the 
severest. Winter ever known in the district. 

‘Went to the service at the Bishop’s church, The 


CHAP, XXIII. FORT GARRY. 357 


sermon was chiefly in reference to poor Mr. Mackenzie's 
death. There was said to be an unusually numerous con- 
crecation, yet, notwithstanding, the church had a very empty 
_ appearance,— partly because it is too large at any rate, 
partly because the majority of the Scotch settlers in the 
immediate neighbourhood are Presbyterians, who have left 
off attending the Episcopalian services since obtaining a 
minister of their own——the Rey. Mr. Black, of the Free 
Church of Scotland, who a few years ago began his useful 
and highly esteemed ministrations.’ 

January 16th. There was a trial to-day which excited 
great interest. An information had been laid against Magnus 
Linklater, the Company’s storekeeper, for selling rum to a 
drunken man; and, had the charge been proved, the Com- 
pany would have been subjected to a fine of £10, and 
deprived of their license till midsummer. Witnesses being 
examined, it soon became evident that the accuser was 
“mistaken,—though his motives were believed honest,—and 
Magnus was acquitted, much to the delight of the community, 
who would have been’ highly inconvenienced by a restraint 
on the Company’s sales. 

‘The laws against selling spirits to Indians are very 
strictly enforced. Forfeiture of license and a £10 fine for 
‘each offence are rigorously imposed if the least drop of 
either spirits or beer is sold to one of pure Indian blood. 
This regulation appears to work well, drunken Indians, who 
used to be constantly troublesome, being now hardly ever — 
seen; but the spirit dealers are in a difficult position, impor- 
tuned for liquor by the Indians, who often disguise themselves 
and make their applications in French (which they sometimes 
speak fluently), and closely watched by their neighbours, who 
are anxious to gain the informer’s reward of. £5 on each 


358 FORT GARRY. CHAP, XXIII. 


proved case. Spite of these difficulties the spirit trade. is 
said to-be enormously lucrative, and such it will continue till 
the vice of drunkenness becomes less prevalent i in the district 
than it now unhappily is. 

‘In an agricultural conversation to-day, it was stated to 
me that cattle have much trouble in getting. food in summer, 
the ground being so broken up with swamps as to cause them 
many miles of daily wandering im. search of pasturage. 
Tnguiring if the drainage of these marshes would be possible, 
I was told that in itself it was the easiest thing in the 
world, my informant having dried a large tract” by a single 
open drain some 900 yards long,-expecting also to make an 

- extensive Improvement by carrying this work two miles 
farther. The drain was not more than two feet wide, by a 
foot and a half in depth, which is sufficient in this deep, soft 
soil, when the floods of a single spiiig-time will enlarge a 
small trench into a wide and deep watercourse; in proof of . 
which it was mentioned that a cow had been drowned in the 
drain just referred to before it had been a year open., The ~ 
unwillingness of the people to labour at such work is the 
great obstacle to carrying out drainage operations. ~ 

‘Cattle are fed on hay during the winter, but little care 
seems to be taken of them at any time. The Company grow 
turnips near Lower Fort Garry, but the settlers seldom do 
so, disliking the trouble, necessary to rear a good~ crop. 
Wheat flourishes here, though apt to be injured by late frosts ; 
it is considered by the Scotch to be superior in yield and 
quality to that grown in their native country. Barley also 
succeeds well, but oats do not thrive. : 

‘There is a great want of wood, even for fuel. What is 
used for building purposes is rafted down.the Red River; no 

considerable supply however is believed to exist. 


"CHAP. ‘XXMr. : FORT GARRY. 359 


‘Labour is scarce, owing to the demand for yoyageurs by 
land and water, which carries off a large proportion of the 
able-bodied Young men. . Moreover, there is reason to doubt - 
if much aptitude for labour belongs to the constitution of 
the native-born inhabitants, especially those of French origin. 
As a rule the French half-breed is said to dislike continuous 
work. No man will labour more cheerfully and gallantly in, 
the severe toils of the voyageur's calling, but these efforts 
are of, short duration, ‘and|wlien they are ended his chief 
desire is to do nothing but,eat, drink, smoke, and be merry, 
_ all of them acts in which he greatly excels. 

‘Though there is much, ener resemblance, the- English, 
or rather Scottish, half-breeils differ considerably from those 
of French origin both in looks,and character ; the former often 
possessing the fair hair and! other physical characteristics of 
a northern race, while in disposition they are more industri- 
ous and more actuated by 2 sense of duty,—for though the 
word “ devoir” is frequently on, the lips of the semi-French- 
mau, the principle of “ devoir ” is not so strong in their hearts 
as the impulses of passion dr caprice. 

“I cannot think so ill of the half-breed population as most 
writers appear to do. Physically they are a fine race, tall, 
straight, and well proportipned, lightly formed but strong, 
and extremely active and enduring. ‘heir chests, shoulders, , 
and waists are of that symmetrical shape so seldom found 
among the broad-waisted, hort-necked English, or the flat- 
chested, long-necked Scotch i their legs are generally 
extremely straight, and of t ose lengthened proportions 
which, when caricatured, tend rither towards the knock-knee -- 
than approach the bow. 

‘Their feet are high in fhe instep; and the long heel 
with large back-sinew, hig outwards-expanded calf, and 


360 FORT GARRY, - omar. XXIN, 


large knee, which accompany a flat foot, are, I think: nevér 
to be seen among them, nor indeed among the pure Indians. 
This form, with its modifications, is more common in Scotland 
than England; possibly mountainous countries cause its 
development, for it is one better fitted for ascent than for 
graceful movement on level ground. 

‘Tn countenance the half-breed is swarthy, with dark hair 
and eyes; his features are often good and aquiline in 
character, but sometimes they are coarse,—though invariably 
well proportioned, and utterly removed from the baboon jaw 
and flat nose of the Old World savage. With some cleverness 
and cheerfulness, their faces generally betray a certain 
moodiness of temper; neither the frank self-reliant generosity 
of the English countenance, nor the sagacious honest respecta- 
bility of the Scottish, are commonly stamped on the aspect 
of these men, at once more meditative and more impulsive. 

‘Tou many at home have'forined a false idea of the half- 
breeds, imagining them to~be; a race little removed from 
barbarians in habits and appearance. They are supposed to 
be copper-coloured men; going about imperfectly clothed and 
grotesquely ornamented, obeying their chiefs, and yielding 
neither respect nor obedience to the laws. Doubtless there 
are some children of white fathers, who, left-with their 
mothers, have been brought up in Indian camps, and 
have little of the European about them—not even the 
language; but the Red River half-breeds are in a totally 
different condition. Their mode of dress is simply that 
universal in the country—which I have already tried to 
describe,—their appearance so little reveals their origin that 
I doubt if a half-breed, dressed and educated like an English- 
man, would seem at all remarkable in London society. They 
build and farm like other people, they go to church and to 


aed 


“CMAP. XXIII. FORT GARRY. 361 


courts of law, they recognise no chiefs (except when they 
elect a leader for their great hunting expeditions), and in all 
respects they are like civilised men, not-more- ‘uneducated, 
immoral, or disorderly, than many communities in the Old 
World. : ut 

‘The Scottish settlers aye a considerable and very thriving 
body. Their farms (in this quarter at least) are entirely on 
the western side of the Red River, where also stand_the Fort 
and the Protestant churches; the French and French half- 
breeds occupy the eastern side, and their large cathedral, with 
its two horn-like little steeples,* and the comfortable-looking 


adjacent establishment of the nuns, are as conspicuous as 


Fort Garry itself, opposite to which they hold their place, 
close beside the farther bank of the stream. 
‘In population the whole settlement, including White 


——Horse Plains, does not much exceed 7000,—the common 


estimate, 10,000, being a great exaggeration,—and this 
number is almost equally divided between Protestants and 
Roman Catholics, with a trifling majority of the former. 


~ This calculation, I am informed, shows also with ‘much 


accuracy the division of the races, those of British origin 
belonging to the Protestant churches, those of French origin 


to the church of Rome.t \ 
‘There are not many Englishmen in the settlement. 


\ 
* This cathedral being soon afterwards burnt down, was rebuilt, I believe, 
“on a different model. 
+ ‘The province of Manitoba... is the smallest province in the 


“Dominion, being only . . . 135 miles long, by . . . 105 miles broad... . . 


At present {1872] the poptl ation numbers about ‘15, 000, of whom not more 


‘than 2000 are pure whites. One- fifth of the number are Indians, either living 
‘in houses or wanderers, one-third English or Scotch half-breeds, and rather 


more than « third French half-breeds.”” Grant (Rey. G.),—Ocean to Ocean, 
1873, p. 66. 


362 FORT GARRY, CHAP. XXUL 


Some years ago a few families came out, but, with one 
exception, they neither throve nor prospered, partly because 
incapable, of that economy in eating which enables the Scot 
to make his first accumulations of money, partly because 
their wives were unequal to heavy out-door labour. Amply, 
however, did these poor women atone for their deficiencies 
abroad, by their neat and erderly habits at home,—setting 
an example much required in those days;—~but there has 
been a reform in such matters of late.’ - 

January 17th, 18th——*On Wednesday (18th) I visited 
the editors of the Nov’ Wester? They were hopeful of success, 
and believed that their paper had already created an appetite 
for general news among the settlers, who had hitherto been 
careless about interests not immediately concerning their 
own district. 

‘On the same day, there was a Coroner's Inquest on a 
woman who had died from excessive drinking. The law, 
so far as I could judge, was almost always impartially ad- 
ministered, and the whole business of the courts conducted 
with the utmost formality and precision.’ 

January 19th.—‘ Neither the south mail, nor:my men, 
have yet arrived. I cannot imagine the cause of this delay, . 
as for some time we have been having beautiful, mild, sunny 


weather; almost, indeed, too warm for comfort in these stove-_ . 


heated houses.’ 

January 2\st—‘ M'Kay and Short arrived, bringing all 
my things from Fort Pelly.’ 

Sunday, January 224.—' Went with the Bishop to St. 
James’s Church, on the Assiniboine, where he officiated in 
the absence of Mr. Taylor, the incumbent. 

‘Several babies being in church, who made a continual 
noise, the Bishop took notice of it in his sermon, remarking 


CHAT. XX1U- _ FORT GARRY. 363 


that he liked to see the children there, as it proved the 
anxiety of their mothers to be present. This is very different 
from the plan of a reverend gentleman I have heard of, who 
orders children out of his chapel as troublesome intruders. 

‘ Disturbances from. children test the true value of a 
sermon. If the interruption seems intolerable, and annoys 
and confuses the preacher, his sermon has been pitched in 
too high a key, and aimed at the nerves rather than the 
heart or understanding ; but if the voices of the little ones 
harmonise like a rude response, and the preacher rather smiles 
than frowns, then the sermon is Christian and human, 
[This rule may hold good in ordinary cases, but one can 
_easily imagine poetical or intellectual discourses of much 
., usefulness and beauty, which would be utterly marred by 
the vehement outcries of an infant--as much out of place 
as a professor’s bland argumentations in a nursery, full of : 
hungry babes. , Nevertheless, a display of impatiencé-by 
the preacher is more detrimental to the finest sermon, than 
the screamings of a multitude of babies—so far as religion 
is concerned.) 

January 23d, 24th, 25th—These were chielly days of 
leave-taking. My men being now arrived, -and all arrange- 
ments complete for the journey to Crow-wing, there was no- 
thing to detain me at Fort Garry, except a natufal reluctance 
to. part: from so mahy kind friends, and to exchange such 
happiness and comfort for the discomforts of another fort- 
night, of monotonous winter travelling. But it was now 
' full time to. return to my own home and country, to which 
I was powerfully drawn by many ties and duties; so I 
determined to press on with all possible haste, in the hope 
of reaching New York before the departure of the Cunard 
steamer that sailed about the middle of February. 


364 FORT GARRY, omar. xxi, 


On Monday (23d) I took leave of all my Red River-inen,” 
except Kline, who was to act as driver and guide during 
the remaining part of the journey: It went to my heart to’! 
say farewell to those excellent fellows, so long partakers* of 
my good and evil fortunes, so cheery in prosperity, so gallant 
in adversity, and I hope and betieve that on this occasion, * 
as on so many others, our feelings were /in -the completest 
accord. I shall ever feel under a debt of gratitude td these 
true and faithful conipanions,—with what- good cause, ‘Jet ~ 
the. readers of my book judge for themselves. 

On Tuesday I paid my- farewell visit to the Bishop of 
Rupert's Land, from whom, with his esteemed sister Miss 
Anderson, I had met with repeated, and very highly prized, 
attentions during the whole of my stay; and on Wednesday 
afternoon came the sorrowful moment of departure from 
Fort Garry,—sorrowful indeed, had I known that among 
those kind and good friends whose hands so cordially grasped 
mine, who speeded me on my way with such warm and 
heart-felt adieux, there were some,—some too, of the kindest 
and best,—on whose faces I should never look again, till, 
“perchance, we meet in some region beyond the grave. 

om havhat a loss did the whole community sustain in 
the death of ‘that grave, prudent, right-ninded man, who so 
excellently riled. the important post of Fort Garry, who 
afterwards, so aly performed the onerous and responsible 


duties devolving | on the Company’s Chief Representative 
abroad.* 


But, for myfelt there is hot only a share in such general 


“Upon the death of SixGeorge Simpson, Mr. Mactavish was appointed 
Governor of Assiniboia, aud Mr. Dallas, one of the Directors of the Company 
at the time, was made Governor-in-Chief of the Territory. The latter resigned 
in 1862, and from that date Mr. Mactavish held both offices, till within a few ; 
mouths of his death, which occurred in July, 1870. 


CHAP. XXIII. FORT GARRY. 365 


and public regrets, thera is deep sorrow for the loss of a 
friend endeared to me by his admirable and most attractive 
qualities, and by a thotisand kindnesses ever freely shown 
me,——kindnesses of ni. trivial’ sort, but displayed in many 
laborious and thouglatful services in my behalf. -I was 
living in thé hope- of seeing him ‘again, on his ‘side of 
* the ocean or Op i inthe, when” of a sudden, in a casual con- 
_ versation, the news Te Teached me that my friend William 
Mactavish was no more. Alas for this world, but not for 
him! Wherever he now may be; this just and good man is 
with the good and just,in some happier place than our poor 
earth can offer to its beloved, honoured, and favoured ones. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 
FORT GARRY TO ENGLAND. 


JANUARY 25th—This afternoon I took my last leave of . 
Fort Gary and all its kind, agreeable, and most friendly 
inmates.* 

It was not our intention to march far before camping, 
but the non-arrival of one of my people, who—through an 
error on his part—had been left behind, in the expectation 
that he would soon come up with us, obliged us to make an 
earlier halt than contemplated, so we only travelled twelve 
miles of the seventy that lay between our starting-point 
and the Fort at Pembina. 

[A curious circumstance happened as I was going to bed, 
-—as I hastily slipped myself between the buffalo robes, a 
wide sheet of electrical flame blazed into my face, for a 
moment illuminating the whole tent. The same thing 
happened on a subsequent occasion, though rather less 
vividly. These flames were doubtless similar to the sparks 
that issue from a cat’s fur when briskly rubbed in the dark 
during frosty weather.] , 

January 26th.— Kline made another of his great - 
journeys, taking me the remaining fifty-eight miles to Pem- 
bina in a single day. We started at 3 am. and arrived at 

* J rejoice to Jearn that Mr. Fortescue, senior clerk at the time of my visit 
(to whom 1 am indebted for much valuable assistance), is still in the Com- 


pany’s service, being at present (1874) officer-in-charge at York Factory, an 
important station on the shores of Hudson's Bay. 


CHAP, XXI¥. FORT GARRY TO ENGLAND. . 367 


the fort at 8.30 p.m, having halted two hours and a half on 
the road. ‘- 

January 27th—No progress to speak of, —owing to time 
lost in hiring another train, which had proved to be indis- 
pensable, the baggage being too heavy for our strength of 
dogs. After much delay a suitable team and driver were found, 
and engaged at a hire of £10 for the journey and return. 

On the cordial and pressing invitation of M. Rolette, I 
stopped for the night at his house, ‘which is three miles 
beyond the Fort in the direction we were travelling. He 
had gathered a large party of friends and neighbours, and 
entertained us very hospitably with a supper and a ball. 
Though it was late when we started next morning,—not 
earlier than about. 9 o’clock,_-we made 35 miles before camp- 
ing at a wooded point some distance past Les Deux Riviéres. 

January 28th-31st—-Nothing remarkable during the 
‘ next few days, except that while camped near Snake ‘River, 
on the 30th, we heard the trees cracking repeatedly from 
the intenseness of the frost; a common circumstance, it 
seems, but-new-to-me——Lhe-reports-wwere loud and sharp; the —-—— 
wood, I was informed, actually splitting into visible rents 
and fissures. 

Late on the 4th, or rather, early on the 5th, we arrived 
at Otter-tail, where, notwithstanding the untimeliness of the | 
hour, we were very hospitably received, and entertained dur- 
ing the following day and night, by Colorel Sawyer, a gentle- 
man who, at one time a member of the Ohio legislature, had 
at length taken up his abode in this remote part of the States : 
remotest, it might then have been termed, for Otter-tail City 
was at the farthest point of settlement in Minnesota, It 
only consisted of some half-a-dozen wooden houses: there 
were also a few scattered farms in the neighbourhood. The. 

} 


“ 


368 \FORT GARRY CHAP, XXLV. 


sheet of water which gives it its name is said to be so 
désignated from a singular tongue of land which projects far 
inwards near the entrance of the tributary stream, shaping 
that part of the lakg4into the form of an otter's tail. Some 
interest attaches to this lake, as beingethe main source of 
the Red River; which, after flowitt thirty or forty miles in 
a southerly direction, bends abruptly northwards, and sub- 
sequently preserves that course until its termination in 
Lake Winnepeg. . nO 

On the 6th we set out-at 8 A.m., passed Leaf-Lake City 
(that_two-house city of the future), afd reached the ferry 
station on the now frozen Crow-wing River about midnight ; 


*. having halted twice on the way. 


plete progress of a nearly total eclipse of the moon, from the 
first slight Invasion of its brilliant circle by the -darkness, 
which gradually enshrouded all but a narrow edge of light, to 
its final deliverance from the slowly retreating obscurity. As 
I reclined“at full length in the cariole, my face was set at a 
convenient angle for thesé lunar observations, and it fortu- 
nately happened that our road always tended in the best 
possible direction for the same purpose. 

After two hours’ test at the ferry-house we resumed our 
march, and at 4 o'clock in the afterioon“of thé 7th arrived 
at Crow-wing City, where we stopped at the first inn thiat 
offered itself, a small tavern kept by a Frenchman: of the 
name of Larue. It was very noisy,—preparations for a ball 
having attracted a crowd of strangers,—but this signified 
little, as I only intended to stay long enough to make parting 
arrangements W ith” my men, and engage a vehicle to take me 
to Saux Rapids, whence there was a stage-waggon on Thurs- 
day morning. 


OMAP, XXIV. TO ENGLAND. 369 


[As I sat in the bar-room I beheld a sight that filled 
me with sorrow and disgust,—the once great: chief of the, 


Ojibways, “ Hole-in-the-day,” reeling abont in a state of _ 


conteraptible drunkenness. This degraded man was folow- 
ing Larue everywhere, with the most abject i impor tunities for 
drink, “Charlie, Charlie, do give me more!” was his piteous, 
incessant cry, while tears ran down his pale and flabby 
cheeks. At length in an agony of supplication he caught 
hold of Larne’s coai-skirt ;»the tavern-keeper spurned him 
away, and he fell on his face wpon the floor, with helpless 
blubberings like a scolded child. ea 

Two Indians stood within, acting as guards of honouy 
for their degenerate chief. They were stern and savage of 
look, their arms and their Scanty dress were almost entirely 
“of native fashion. One of them bore in his hand a long 
tomahawk. I watched this man’s eye when Larue spurned 
the drunkard from him, and I saw that there was but a step 


between that lively young Frenchman and his tomb. . But-->~ 


doubtless the Indian was accustomed to such scenes, and had 


learnt to control his feelings ; at all events, he and his com- - 


panion made no hostile movement, but quietly crossed the room 


to their abjéct leader, lifted him up in their arnts, and put him. 


into a handsome horse-sleigh which awaited him at the door. 
‘This Hole-in-the-day was a- rich man, being largely 
subsidised by the United States, who paid him an annuity 
for the districts purchased from the tribe, besides granting 
him extensive reservations of land. _He owned a house 
furnished in the European style, in which each of his six 


wives had het separate apartment ; he had fine horses, fine 


sleighs, and every luxury his heart could desire. , Once he 
was poor, now he is rich: once, warriors would. fall before 


him; now, he licks the dust at a publican’s feet. 
2B 


\. 
370 FORT GARRY =~. CHAP, SNIY, 


The first Indian I saw in the United States was a 
drunken blackguard reeling through a beautiful forest; the 
last I saw was a drunken chief grovelling in a road-side 
tavern.]* 

February 8th.—A few words will | suffice -for the 
remainder of my journey: Leaving Crow-wing-at nidnight 
I reached Saux Rapids in eighteen hours, and then wen 
by stage to St. Anthony. Arriving at St. Paul on the 10th 
I started carly the following morning, slept at Wabashaw, 
and on Sunday afternoon reached La Crosse, having travelled 
the Jast five-and-thirty miles from Wenona on the frozen ., 
surface of the Mississippi At La Crosse I came within 
reaclr of railways, and proceeding uninterraptedly, except by 
same changes of train, for three nights and two days, arrived 
at New York about hoon on Wednesday the 15th. 

Finding myself too late for the regular Cunard steamer, 

s ys * . » > 
—the “ Asia,” it appeared, having just-sailed,—I drove to the 
Brevoort House, and for the secoud time settled myself at 
that most comfortable hotel ; intending to take my passage 
in the “Canada,” another steam-vessel of the same line, which 
was to start from Boston in a few days. I was fortunate 
enough, however, to become acquainted with the late Sir 
* “ Bugron-a-he-shig literally means Hole-in-the-sky, The war-song of 
this chief was addressed to his guardian spirit, seen through a hole in the sky.” 
—SclooLeRsrt,—Report on the Indian Tribes af the United States, vol. iic 160. 
As this Report was published in 1831, it is possible that the chief there 
referred to was the father of the chief seen by me in 1860; for with the Ojib- 
ways (unlike many of the other trihes) personal nantes often descend in families. 
The warrior described ‘by Mr. Schoolcraft js spoken of as the bravest of the 
brave. ‘‘ Some of his contemporary warriors say of him— At the moment of 
excitement he wonld have thrown himself into the fire.’ . . He had that way 
about him that induced the few who really loved him to be willing even to die 


for him. . . During his lifetime he, distinguished himself in eight different 
fights.”—ScHooLcrsritjg—vol, i. p. 167. 


CHAP. XXIV. TO ENGLAND. . 371 


Edward Cunard, who, on learning my intentions, very oblig- 
ingly offered me a pasdage in the “ Etna,” one of the-Com- 
pany’s fine screw-steamers, which was shortly starting for’ 
Liverpool, under the command of my old acquaintance 
Captain [now Sir James] Anderson. ~ ~~~ 

A few pleasant days g glided quickly by amidst the atuse- 
ments of New York, Again I found myself a‘sharer in the 
frank and genial hospitalities so cordially offered me by 
acquaintances both old and new, though to none was I so 

Namueh indebted during both my visits to this city, as to my 

very agreeable friend#, the R Is, whose kindness I shall 
never forget. Then came the hour of departure, and on the 7 
19th of February I bade my final adieu to the New World. 

I was the only passenger on board the “Etna,” that vessel 
being one of the Company’s goods-steamers, and found my- 
self in possession of an excellent deck-cabin, large and airy, 
infinitely preferable to the close and narrow quarters I had 
occupied in the “ Africa;” everything in short had been, 
and continued to be, done for my comfort during the twelve 
days of the homeward voyage. Butright glad was I once 
more to set foot on my native land, after so long an absence 
and such distant wanderings. . 


APPENDIX. 


nee Coen 


REMARKS ON “THE WINTER’S TALE.” 


JULY 28th—‘Finished “The Winter's Tale.” ‘How grandly 
Hermione replies to the King's first accusations! It is consistent 
with her frank and noble objective character, ‘that tears and anger 
should not be so ready as with the weaker Desdemona or more 
womanish Imogen. What instinctive truth belongs to Shake- 
speare! It cannot be supposed that he laboriously studied out 
every little touch that gives individual life to his characters ; his 
great imagination gajded him’ into spiritual verities, even without 


the cognisance of Hig n., 
‘How inconsiste ould it have seemed for “wen or 
Imogen to say—“I am ‘ot prone to weeping . . . but I have 


that honourable grief lodged here which burns worse than tears 
drown.” It is just this sort of woman that would be so frankly 
kind to her husband’s friend, as to give colour to a jealous fool’s 
suspicions ;—note her own words. 

‘Then is it not subtly fine that the ghost of Hermione should 
be represented as diffused in tears, the feebler inner-soul, 
unsupported by the nobly strong physical woman, yielding help- 
lessly to weakness? It may be said that it was not a real ghost, 
as the queen was living. Nevertheless we must hold it as a 
temporary separation of her body and her spirit—such as seems 
sometimes to occur in mesmeric trances-—or the impressiveness of 
the story is lost. Are we to hold that a mere fit of indigestion 
communicated prophetical lore to Antigonus ? 

‘I dislike Florizel’s falsehood to King Leontes about his 
father. It might easily have been avoided. A dramatist ought 


4. ~ . ~ 
37d APPENDIX. - 


not to sink his higher characters by hasenesses which we cannot 
forget nor forgive. ° 

“CTs it not well done that Leontes, ere his reunion with 
Hermione, should have won back our sympathy hy his loving 
penitence, and giyen earnest of future goodness! The queen’s 
restoration would otherwise have been painful. It must be 
observed, also, that Leontes made no direct attempt against her 
life. It would have heen incongruous to restore Desdemona to 
Othello with an indelible finger-gripe on her neck. Posthumus, 
indeed, orders Imogen’s death, but he does not himself use 
violence. 

‘Poor Camillo! why reward all his worthiness by mating him 
to that windmill-tongued old wretch Paulina?’ 


REMARES ON “HAMLET.” 


July 30th.—[ With such splendour has Shakespeare surrounded 
the very name of Hamlet, so largely has he made that character 
the mouthpiece for his own loftiest meditations, that, dazzled by 
the glory which encompasses this prince of tragedy-princes, most 
people account him a noble-minded hero,—a sort of suffering 
demigod,—and resent all attempt to show him in a less favour- 
able light, as an offence against poetry and morals, nay, even as 
an attack upon the great dramatist himself. That such notions, 
as well as others commonly associated with the Hamlet drama, 
are untenable, is my settled belief, and I hope that the fol- 
lowing remarks may tend toform or strengthen that conviction in 
at least some minds; though, indeed, when thus writing, I had no 
controversial design, my observations being merely intended to 
enlarge and elucidate the notes which now barely serve for their 
foundation, . 

With these remarks I proceed to an extract from my journal- 
notes for the 31st of July, which were written immediately after my 
first attentive reading of “Hamlet,” an undertaking happily begun 
during our halt on the shores of thé beautiful. Jack-fish Lake. ] 


. REMARKS ON HAMLET. 375 


. 

July 31st— Finished reading ‘‘ Hamlet ;” will read it again 
and again... ., Hamlet was more mad than-he himself 
supposed-—it was not all feigning. The slight unhingement of 
mind on seeing the ghost suggested to him to feign insanity. It 
is easy for imaginative men to go into half madness if they choose 
to give fancy the rein. They are always half mad in mind— 
fools are half mad in word’ and act.’ 

(There can be little doubt that Hamlet was pot intended by 
Shakespeare to be actually mad. 

(1) The subject of the original history of Hamlet (written i> 
Latin by Saxo Grammaticus towards the elose of the twelfth 
century, reproduced in French by Belleforest in his Hisloires 
Lragiques (begun in 1564), and thence translated into English), 
which forms the basis of Shakespeare’s drama, as well as most 
probably of earlier dramas on the same story, specially consists 
in the crafty devices carried out by the young Prince of Denmark 
under the guise of lunacy. Though Shakespeare modifies the 
old tales whence his plots are derived; it is not his general prac- 
tice to alter them essentially ; but to make feigned madness into 
real jhadness, in the case of the hero of this story, would be to 

‘change its whole spirit and design. 

(2) The rude extravagancies of the ancient Hamlet being 
softened down in the earlier Shakespearean drama printed in 1603, 
the poet softens them down yet furtherin the matured play of 
1604, as if wishing to prevent the maglness from seeming too real. 
The hero is too mad in the old story, and too sane In the matured 
play, to deceive the careful observer, but in the immature play 
the trae aspect of madness had been rather over-closely presented. 

(3) The shrewdest observers in the play do not consider 
Hamlet to be mad. The King, Polonius, Rosencrantz, and Guil- 
demstern, all doubt or refuse to allow his insanity, while admitting 
his extravagance. Horatio quite ignores it; it is only the Queen 
and Ophelia who are fully deceived. 

(4) Hamlet Mistinetly announces his intention to “put an antic 
disposition on,” and he does so occasionally with very obvious 
design. 

2 


376 “APPENDIX. . 


(5) Hamlet repeatedly declares that he is not mad, except in 
policy, ‘TI essentially am not in madness, but mad in craft :” 
* Ecstasy! my pulse, as yours, doth temperately kéep time . . . 
it is not madness that I have uttered: bring me to the test :” 
“Tam but mad north-north-west :” immediately after which last~ 
quoted saying he puts a most “ antic disposition” on: to ridicule 
Polonius, as quickly resuming a manner of the shrewdest sense 
on the entrance of the Players. ao 

(6) His general conversation, habits, and conchct, are as far 
as possible from those commonly attributed to lunatics. 

(7) His general conduct and conversation are not those of a 
lunatic as represented elsewhere in Shakespeare’s writings. See, 
for. example, Ophelia’s real derangement :— She .". . spurns 
enviously at straws: speaks things in doubt, that carry but half 
sense; her speech is nothing, yet the unshaped use: of it doth 
move the hearers to collection: they aim at it, and botch the 
words up fit to their own thoughts.” Hamlet, on the contrary, 
in his wildest moods, speaks with bitter positiveness things of 
the clearest meaning-; his replics are “ pregnant ;” his speech, 
even when “Jacking form a little,” is, “not like madness.” 

On the other hand it may be urged :—(1} There are strange 
outbreaks which could scarcely be counterfeit ; such as Hamlet's 
“wild and whirling” words to his father’s ghost—“ Ah ha, boy! 

.. art thou there, truepenny? ;.. ,- well -said,-old- mole!” 
the sudden brutality of his sarcasms in the interview with 
Ophelia ; and his extravagantly disgusting conduct at her burial. 
(2) Hamlet himself most solemnly declares his own “sore distrac- 
tion,” when apologising to Laertes for the burial outrage. 
“What I have done’... I here proclaim was madness. . . . 
If Hamtet from himself be ta’en away .» .. then Hamlet does 
it not. Who does it then ?+—His madness." Such a defence, if 
mere simulation, would be impossible, it might be said, for an 
even moderately honourable man ; and one so steeped in baseness 
as to he capable of shielding himself by such degrading falsehood, 
must necessarily be an old and suspected offender against honour, 
incapable of impressing many persons with a belief in his - 


oO 


REMARKS ON HAMLET. _ “397 


noblenéss of character. Never could the discreet Horatio .have 
had reason to say of such a one—“ Now cracks a noble heart. 
Goodnight, sweet prince.’ Nor the manly Fortinbras—* Let 
four captains bear Hamlet like a soldier . . . for he was likely 

. to have proved right royally.” Nor the sensitive Ophelia 

—“ (© what a noble mind is here o’erthrown!” 

The true explanation I believe to be that given in my 
“journal, one which independently suggested itself on first perusal 
of the play, though I have met with it since. Hamlet’s 
mind was slightly unhinged: he felt it to be so, and his swift 


imagination immediately showed him how his infirmity might be-- 


turned to profit by an easy exaggeration of its nature and extent: 


When it pleased him to control himself, he could generally do so - 


to perfection; when he preferred to yield to his impulses, he 
could always do so with effect. He was one of those who have 
more art in dealing with a situation created for them, than in 
creating one for themselves. In act, he seeks to falsify his own 
axiom——“ There's a divinity doth shape our ends, rough-hew 
them how we will;” changing it into—Doth rough-hew our 
ends, we shape them how we will ;—for, in reality, he usually has 
no ends at all. 

I cannot agree in that very gencrally received estimate of 
Hamlet's character which is so eloquently expressed by Goethe, in 
his Wilhelm Meister (Book iv. chap. 13, Carlyle’s transtation).* 
“Shakespeare meant ... to represent’ the effects of a great 
action laid upon a soul unfit for the performance of it... . A 
lovely, pure, noble, and most moral nature, without the strength 
of nerve which forms a hero, sinks beneath a burden which it 
cannot bear, and must not cast away.” 

‘Except in one respect, there is no want of nerve in Hamlet's 
constitution ; on the contrary, he shows himself fearless, and 
even reckless, beyond most people’s ‘measure___His-one weak- 
ness {is a want of originating will-power ; an innate defect derived 
from\his feebly voluptuous mother, along with, perbaps, a certain 


.* ty. quotation is taken from the preface to the Clarendon Press Series 


edition of * Hainlet.” ¢ 
ma : 


a 


iw 


378 : ‘ APPENDIX. 


physical inertness. Let circumstances throw -him into action, 
and no one goes straighter to his mark. Far from shrinking 
from the sternest action, he loves it; when he receives a strong 
impulse to set him agoing, he feels like a disarmed warrior new 
furnished with a sword; he revels in his, power to wound the 
hearts and lives of those whom his moods may prompt him td 
attack, whether or not they have-done him-any adequate injury. 

But when it is not a question of some special action suddenly 
presented to him, when, a complex system of action has tobe 
determined on, then his, want of originative will hampers and 
perplexes him; and not only so, but his subtle imagination 
oppresses him with a burdensome crowd of ideas, which it takes 
him long—too long—to classify and reduce to working form. 

Had he ever attained |to seeing his way he would have gone 
straight forward—no manj better; but then a.path needs more 
illumination for some people than others, because they are more 
particular where they set théir feet. Is it generally considered 
how difficult his path was} The action of the play (as I shall 
presently endeaypur to show) hardly, if at all, belongs to rude 
and lawless times, but to a period of civilisation and order, when 
high-handed murder could not be perpetrated with impunity, nor 
rebellion entered on without) preparation, or, at least, a fair pre- 
text. Which of us moderns would lightly hasten to the murder 
of an uncle—one’s lawful sovereign, one’s own mother’s husband, 
—merély because a phantom declared his guilt ?—~the corrobora- 
tive evidence being little or none. Instead of thinking the 
scheme wherein to “catch the conscience of the king,” a mere 
excuse for procrastination, I see in it the ingenious expedient of 
an “indifferent honest” mind, very reasonably mistrusting its 
own impressions. Whéther or not ghosts were more believed in 
then than now, who could be sure, as Hamlet says, that this one 
was not a fiend in disguise 1—“ The devil hath power to assunre 
a pleasing shape.” “lot oe 

But Hamlet’s mind being partially off its balance, it was a 
perilous experiment to unchain his passions, and act the madness 
to which he ever so slightly tended ; consequently, as the action 


REMARKS ON HAMLET, 379 


advances, and the pressure on his brain becomes heavier, we find 


indications of real and dangerous excitement under provocative 
circumstances ; and to this—to partial and momentary, not to 


_ entire and permanent, alienation of mental control—I partly - 
attribute such incidents as the outbreak of cruel sarcasm in the © 


interview with Ophelia, the frenzied declamation when the King 
has been “ frighted with false fire,” and, above all, the almost 
veritably mad behaviour in the burial scene. I think, moreover, 
that Hamlet-was-not unconscious of* these aberrations, and thus 
deluded himself (in the myth-making fashion of his mother) into 
believing that he made his aende to Laertes with perfect sincerity 
and honour. 

The word mad is indeterminate: we need clearer definitions 
before pronouncing absolutely on Hamlet's state. It may be 
remarked, in passing, that we are led to understand that he 

_ perpetrated many wild eccentricities—like King David's, perhaps, 
when feigning madness among the Philistines—of which no 
details are given-— ; 

‘Grating so harshly all his days of quiet, 
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy ’— 
this being said (Act iii. 1) before any violent actions or speeches 
are recorded: besides which his lunacy was currently believed 
in by the populace (Act v. 1); which could hardly have been the 
case without some conspicuous demonstrations on his part. One 
would naturally expect this, as Hamlet’s deeds, under the pre- 
tence of madness, form a very important portion of the ancient 
story :—“ Hee rent and tore his clothes, wallowing and lying in 
the durt and mire, his face all filthy and blacke, running through 
the streets like a man distraught, not speaking one word but 


+ 9 
such as seemed to proceed of madness and meere frenzie.”—_ 


(CoLLIER,—Shakespeare’s Library, vol. i. p. 137.) 

Goethe’s dictum, that Hamlet was of “a lovely, pure, and 
most moral nature,” I find it impossible to accept. This, to my 
mind, mistaken notion arises from want of discrimination between 
‘Hamlet’s deeds and his words ; and, again, between his, own 
deeds and words, and those of other people i in reference to him. 


Pome 


L co 


380 APPENDIX. 


The strength of his character—and the key to it—consists in a 
magnificent imagination of the receptive sort; as the weakness 
lies in a want of originating, creative will. A character of that 

" type is essentially deceptive, because its power of assimilation causes 
it, chameleon-like, to assume all hues ; so that, if through circum- 
stances it is inclined to the eception of beautiful influences, it 
receives sitch store of them:as to seem eminently beautiful in the’ 
sheen of its borrowed adornments. 

Jt is perhaps scarcely fair to contrast Hamlet’s character with 
that of his friend Horatio, the latter being so little brought before 
us in action. * Yet we have good grounds for allowing to Horatio » ; 
all the nobleness’ascrilved to him by others in the play, for neither 
in word nor deed does he ever fall short of his standard ; while as 
regards ‘Hamlet, though admitting his high reputation, we are 

‘compelled to assign it less to his deeds than to his vast stock of 
excellent sentiments, some of which, in truth, had little enough 

. relation to his actual nature. But from this specious show of lofty 
habitudes of mind, in addition to fascinating manners and many 
dazzling accomplishments, arose the exaggerated estimate of his 

| nobleness formed by most of the personages in the drama. As 

*a curious illustration of the unplanned deceptiveness of his 
character, observe the rémark of his uncle, King Claudius, when 
speaking of him to Laertes—“ “He being remiss, most generous, 
and free from all contriving.’ And this of the wary, subtle, 
secretive, dissimulating Hamlet y 


‘Hamlet says that he is ambitious:—“I am very’ proud, 
revengeful, ambitious :”—it seems likely that he was.’ 

[Little as  self-accusations, or half-ironical- self-regarding 
sarcasms, are meant to be taken as true, there is often much 
truth in-them, and they serve to show how the wind sets in a 
man’s brain; he has, at any rate, been occupying his thoughts 
on the subject. Hamlet manifests all the faults of which he 
definitely accuses himself, but in the negative, feminine manner 

that belongs to his nature, one which feels and speaks rather 
. than acts. His revengefulness displays itself in bitterness, his . 


aL 


aN . 
NS ride and ambition take the form of wounded vanity. “Not 
so, my lord: I ant too much i’ the sun :”—Hor. “ Your poor ser- 
vant .ever. Ham. ll change that name with you:”—“ And 
what so poora man as Hamlet is, may do:”—“I am most dread- 
fully attended : ”—“TI eat the air, promise-crammed: you cannot 
feed capons so :”-—“ Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks: ” 
—“ Why should the poor be flattered ?”—“ What advancement 
may I hope from thee ?”—“ Sir, I lack advancement:” surely 
these citations prove that poverty and lack of position,—neither 
of which could have been more than comparative, in the case of 
the intensely beloved son of the Queen, the acknowledged heir to 
dhe throne of Denmark,—formed cause of discontentment to the 
prince, so constant and embittering that dignity and self-respect 
were unable to save him from laying bare the rankling wound at 
every opportunity, whether in presence of friend. or foe. Would 
Horatio have permitted himself such weak self-display? ~Is there 
anything of fortitude or heroism in Hamlet’s incessant complain- 
ings, however natural and excusable ? ’ 
There is no warrant for the notion that Hamlet was debarred 
from a throne that was his by right of succession, The crown 
was clearly elective,—a fact which Hamlet himself does not dis- 
pute: “popped in between the election and my hopes,” is the 
charge he brings against his uncle, he does not in that sense 
accuse ‘him of usurpation; and his very last breath is spent in 
promoting the election of Fortinbras to the vacant throne :— 


REMARKS ON HAMLET. 381 


“But I do prophesy the election lights 
“* On Fortinbras : he.has my dying voice.” 


It would nevertheless appear, from the passage just quoted, and 
from the remark of Rosencrantz to Hamlet—“ You have the 
voice of the King himself for your succession,’—-that potent in- 
fluence accompanied the recommendation of those high in place, 
especially that of the reigning sovereign. But for the premature 
‘death of the elder Hamlet, he would undoubtedly have nominated 
his son as successor ; but no such nomination having been made, 
Claudius, aided by the Queen and Polonius, secures the election, 


an 


382 APPENDIX. 


and, in doing so, seems unconscious that ‘young Hamlet has been 
wronged, or even given cause for discontent. With evident 
sincerity the King exclaims (speaking of his nephew),— 
. “What it should be 
More than his father’s death, that thus’ hath put him 
So much from the understanding of himself, 


I cannot dream of." 


Subsequently the Queen expresses herself very similarly, when 
replying to the King’s remark that Polonius had found “ the 
head and source of all her [your] son's distemper : ”— 


“‘T doubt it is no other than the main, 
His father’s death and our o’er-hasty marriage.” 


Had Hamlet been deprived of his succession illegally, or even . 
by straining of law, it is impossible that the usurpers should not 
have known that the disinherited prince had other grounds for 
discontent than those they specify. It is clear enough, however, 
that even if Hamlet did not think himself actually wronged in 
this exclusion, he was yet exceedingly disappointed at the sudden _ 
eclipse of his fortune. 

It seems probable that disgust at his own subordinated posi- 
tion” had as much to do with Hamlet’s melancholy, as grief for 
his “dear father murdered,” or righteous indignation at his 
mother’s lapse from honour. People feel things differently. 
Hamlet had a refined and subtle intellect, and may be credited 
with lofty aspirations, but selfism (not exactly selfishness) was of 
the essence of his character; and such a character feels few 

- except the most physically startling events by immediate impres- 
sion, but passes them through his mind,and more or less con- 
sciously decides- whether or not. to feel them. His feelings, - 
thereforé, though often sufficiently good and powerful at the 
last, are to some extent at his own command“at t the first ; and 
where present feelings connected with —his personal ” “wellbeing 
are also "under consideration, they are apt to dom mjnate those- 
that relate to.a remoter interest. Not so with the more e objective | 
mind ; impressions with it are as wounds which Iirt, and which 


REMARKS ON HAMLET. 383 


endure, according to the intrinsic nature and force of the blow 
that has occasioned them. With a Hamlet it is—TI am miserable : 
Wherefore? My father is dead. With an Ophelia—My father .is 
dead, therefore I am miserable. 

Hamlet had too much feeling for himself to have much for 
others, except as ministers to his comfort or convenience, though 
that by no means prevented others from having great feeling for 
him. His grief in the first interview with Ophelia must have 
been mostly pity for himself, not compassion for her, to judge by 
his subsequent brutality; in fact he shows no sign of active good- 
heartedness throughout the whole drama, except in his injunction 
to the players regarding Polonius,—* See you mock him not,’— 
which, I suspect, sprang from his consciousness that he had been 
too much lowering the dignity of high station, in presence of men 
of humbler rank, by his gibes at the Lord Chamberlain, a mistake 
that both pride and policy impelled him to set right. 

The Hamlet in the ancient story is an utterly unscrupulous, 
though most able and crafty man, and Shakespeare, no doubt, to 
a great extent elaborated his Hamlet from the original character. 


_ _£Hamlet attempts to excuse his irresolution in not killing 
“his uncle when at prayer, by the pretence that he waits for a 
deeper revenge.’ 

[I do not think that Shakespeare's Hamlet habitually enter- 
tained thoughts so diabolical, but, through the force of his brood- 
ing imagination, he at the moment believed in those ideas, and 
felt an intellectual pleasure in contemplating his own sublime 
malignity. His real motive for sparing the King was, partly want 
of the impulse his nature required (a sort of psychical “Dutch 
-conrage ”), partly the natural reluctance of a refined, and more or 
less honourable, gentleman to commit a cold-blooded murder.] 


‘It seems to:me improbable that the players should have 
— acted before the King and Queen a play which, at the very out- 
set, condemns the Queen's conduct i in regard to her second marriage, 
especially as this “ over-hasty marriage” appears to have offended 


384 APPENDIX. 


the nation, and been a common subject of talk. Moreover, the 
dumb show at the beginning too acetirately represents the real 
mutder. So astute a man as Hamilet could not have‘ wished the 
King to know with cer tainty/that the horrible secret was dis: 
covered, I believe that Hamilét had no doubt of his uncle’s guilt, 
but feigned to himself that. he wished for further confirmation, 
through watching his conduct at the play, as a mere excuse for 
irresolution. Hamlet himself had remarked how easily an actor 
changes his countenance under the influence of the fictitious passion 
excited by his subject, and might not a spectator be equally 
affected, although not a “ galled jade 2) 

[As has already heen shown, I dissent from my former opinion 
that Hamlet was satisfied of his uncle’s guilt. I continue to 
think that the players are made to present too closely the real 
circumstances of the King’s murder and the Queen’s marriage. 
Apart from abstract considerations, what are Hamlet's own words? 
“Tl have these players play something like the murder of my. 
father,” and afterwards, —“There is a play ‘to-night . .. one 
scene of it comes near the circumstance... of my father's 
death.” But in fact this scene is much more than something like 
that described by the ghost, it is identical with it,—the slumber in 
the garden, the puison poured into the ear, and, as if to prevent 
any ‘chance of misapprehension, the motive of the murderer, and 
his marriage with his victim’s widow, are carefully stated to the 
audience, 

Surely in these improbabilities there must either have’ been 
oversight, possibly from+indifference..on--Shakespeare’s part to 
what he deemed unimportant ; or concession to some theatrical 
dictation, prompted perhaps by unwillingness to alter the estab- 
lished representation of a favourite scene in existing popular 
dramas-on the story of Hamlet. 

A mere change of countenance in those witnessing a play, 
especially a play calculated-to “appal the free” as well as to 

“make mad the guilty,” proyes nothing, arising as it might from 
extreme sensitiveness of nerve, or, on the part of one who knows 
himself suspected, from a fear of confirming the suspicion ; never- 


1 \ 


. 


REMARKS ON HAMLET, 385 . 


theless, in Hamlet’s casé it was worth while to seek for corrobora- 
tive evidence by carefully watching the King. I cannot, however, 
believe that he lay staring open-eyed at his uncle, with an 
ostentation of brutal rudeness, as some actors have represented 
him to do, absurdly exaggerating the suggestion of the words— 
“For I mine eyes will rivet on his face.” 


‘Hamlet must have been at least thirty, by his reminiscencés 
of Yorick, who died twenty- -three years before. He speaks of his 
mother as a “ matron” long past her younger days.’ 

[Thirty is distinctively ‘specified as Hamlet’s age, but there is 
evident incongruity between the earlier and later parts of the 
play in regard to this matter. At first the prince’s youthfulness 
is dwelt on as if it were something almost noteworthy: “Young 
Hamlet ”—* Going back to school: [college] at Wittenberg ”— 
“For Hamlet and. . . his favour, hold it . . . a violet in the 
youth of primy nature” — Thou noble youth”—* Unmatched 
form and feature of blown youth ”—“Believe so much in him 
that he is young:” and this idea of a scarcely developed man- 
hood is preserved until the fifth act, when, in the scene with 
the gravediggers, we are informed, with an obviously designed 
precision, that Hamlet is exactly thirty years of age, a statement 
at variance with the spirit, if not the letter, of the passages just 
quoted. ‘ 

It is difficult even to conjecture a cause for this inconsistency, 
the more remarkable that it does not exist in the quarto of 1603, 
where the gravedigger dates the defeat of the elder Fortinbras as 
happening “a dozen yeare” back instead of “thirty,” and where 
much less is said about Hamlet’s youthfulness; perhaps the 
change was designed to suit the appearance and age of some 
individual actor, or intended to recall some event which had 
happened thirty years before the date of a particular representa- 
tion,—_“I have been sexton here, man and boy, thirty years,” 
would come very effectively on an anniversary occasion from the 

lips of an old popular favourite. But, explain it as one may, the 
inconsistency exists, and I should prefer to reconcile it by believ- 
26 


—_ | A 


386 - APPENDIX. 


ing the “thirty "a reckless error, than wrong so many other pass- 
ages in accepting it as right. In all probability Hamlet was not 
much more than twenty years of age, nor thé Queen, his mother, 
still attractive though a matron, much more than double the age 
of her only son.] 


‘T do not think that Hamlet was a fat man ;—“ fat and scant 
of breath” means out of condition, which he might well be when 
undergoing such troubles. The Queen would hardly have said 
“he’s fat,” if his corpulency had been evident and notorious. 
Ophelia, moreover, speaks of his “unmatched form.””’ 

[Some authors believe that the expression “ fat and scant of 
breath” was allusive to the stoutness of Richard Burbage, the 
original actor of the part of Hamlet—on the principle of making 
a virtue of necessity—as if to declare if essential in the drama 
that the prince should be of ponderous figure. * J think the other 


a sounder view: Hamlet.was not corpulent, though perhaps in- 


elined that w ay ; he was merely out of condition. As he says 
himself— “T have of late .*. . forgone all custom of exercises.” 
Against this, however, may be quoted another of his own 
sayings—* Since he [Laertes] went into France, I have been in 
continual practice fin fencing];” along with the King’s assertion 
to Laertes—“ Sir, this report of his did Hamlet ‘so envénom 
with his enyy that he could nothing do but wish and beg your 
sudden coming o'er to play with him.” We have here, I 


believe, anotheF of. the poet's "occasional oversights ; for the 
statements’ ‘tite incompatible, unless one suppose the former of 


“them a mere invention to deceive the traitorous friends. But, 


. besides that Hamlet’s speech on that.occasion ‘bears the stamp of 


truthfulness, itis far more likely that.a.man, “really: y ielancholy, 


and fictitiously mad, should refrain from’such an ‘ exerdise as fene-" - 


ing, fhan practice at incessantly, “at the risk of attracting Femark, ] 


peeeee? ee tt Oe ae 


Ww chy should ‘Laertes ‘persevere in his base ‘revengé after 
accepting Hamlet’s explanation? He acts as the’ Indian savages 
*See ‘ Hamlet "—Clarendon Press Series, 1872. Notes; p. 271. 


-” ‘ 
cf ~ 


, iF 


REMARKS ON HAMLET. 387 


do—blood for blood; without regarding whether the slain got 
his death foully, fairly, accidentally, or by his own deed, as when 
one rushes against the levelled spear of.another, 

[The play of Hamlet belongs in a manner to two epochs—to 
the rough times of: coarse carousal, and single-handed duels 
between monarchs for disputed territories, as well as to the more 
polished and educated period of universities and Parisian fencing- 
masters ; though, on examination, it will be found that the latter 
idea immensely predominates,—that while the mere setting of the 
play is partly antique, its whole action belongs’to a period little, 

‘if at all, antecedent to the era of the poet himself. The former 
idea, indeed, has little prevalence (apart from the known relation of 
the drama to the ancient Scandinavian story), except in the par- 
ticulars already mentioned, and in the reference to reeent defeats 
of England by the Danish arms, entailing homage and annual 

‘tribute from the vanquished power—a state of things only his- 
torically conceivable as existent in the remote past. 

But, on the other side, we are..overwhelmed with proofs of 
Shakespeare’s intention to lay his action in modern times. Ham- 
let and Horatie are students at a German university ; Laertes 
repairs to Paris for instruction in polite accomplishments ; King 
Claudius is guarded by “ Switzers,’ and wages war by means of 
“brazen cannon,” while kettle-drums and trumpets and ordnance- 
salvos enliven’ his “festivities. Prince Hamlet’s every-day .cos- 
tume of doublet, hat, stockings, and garters, has little in common 
with the dress of the ancient Danes, any more than. his delicate 
“rapier” resembles their ponderous spears and battle-axes. ._The 
classics are freely referred to; lawyers with their quiddities, 

 quilleis, cases, tenures, and tricks, are familiarly spoken of, and 

specimens of their handiwork, in the matter of treaties and royal 

missions, are offered to us; we even find~“crowner’s quest’ law ” 

in full..and beautiful existence. Pictures “are suspended on the 
“arras”-covered walls; miniatures adorn the courtier "s-neck, and 

“tablets” hing at his girdle. And, if all this were not enough 

to fix the period, we are given, in Osric, the elaborate portrait of 

a euphuising Elizabethan exquisite ; while the “players” form 


t 


38 


va) 


APPENDIX. 


the very “abstract and brief chronicle of the time” in which - 
Shakespeare lived and wrote. 

Strange is it that, in spite of such weight of reason for treat- 
ing “ Hamlet” as a Renaissance story, one should constantly see 
stage-managers oscillating in their treatment of it between eras 
removed from each other by some five or six centuries ; present- 
ing us, for example, with a portrait of old King Hamlet as a 
semi-savage (as if full-length oil-pictures belonged to the days 
of Sweyn or Canute), though in his .ghost-hood he always 
appears asa plate-armoured knight, equipped for a Tudor tourna- 
ment. But the final scene-is the great triufaph of unreason, 
when we behold Hamlet and Laertes, in’ fancy dresses, fighting a 
duel with foils, seconded by Osric and his fellow-courtiers in 
doublets and trunk-hose, and regarded from on high by royalties 
-in Oriental garments; while the whole takes place in a vast, cavern- 
ous, Stonchenge-like hall, decorated with semi-mythical Danish 
symbols and devices—dragons, vulture-wings, land-ravager-ban- 
ners, battle-axes, black ravens, and the like;-the background 
being crowded with the figures of barbaric guards, evidently fresh 
returned from coercing Ethelred the Unready, or some such Saxon 
potentate of bygone days. ' 

* Nay, farmore surprising, one discovers even in the writings 
of so able and judicious a critic as Mr. Knight such a passage ’as 
this, which I take leave to quote :—“ That Shakspere adopted 
the period of the action as related by Saxo Grammaticus there 
can be no doubt. The following passage is decisive :— 


and, England, if my love thou hold’st at ought, 
(As my great power thereof may give thee sense ; 
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red 

After the Danish sword, and thy free awe 


Pays homage to us) thou may’st not coldly set 
Our sovereign process,’ ” 


We have here a distinct intimation of the period before the Norman 
Conquest, when England was either under the sovereignty of the 
Northmen, as in the time of Canute, or paid tribute to the 


* REMARKS ON HAMLET, 389 


Danish power.”—(Pictorial Edition of Shakspere. Introductory 
Notice to Hamlet, p. 97 ; Tragedies, vol. i.) 

, Surely, where anachronism cannot be avoided, it is better to 
choose the course which leads to a few violations of histuric fact, 
and a very few of historic probability (neither of a description 
much affecting the intellectual value of the play), than to choose 
that which positively turns the world upside down ; which defaces 
Shakespeare’s noblest work with an absurdity as great in kind, 
and nearly so in degree, as if one transferred its action to 
Ashanti-land and brought Hamlet naked on the stage! This 
is not a historical play, like “Julius Caesar” or “Coriolanus,” 
where scene and date are unmistakably prescribed; nor does 
it resemble such works of fancy as “The Winter's Tale” or “A 
Midsummer Night's Dream,” where anachronisms seem purposely 
introduced ; it is a drama of complex thought and feeling, one 
specially marked as belonging to a cultivated and artificial Euro- 
pean epoch, clearly unassignable to any earlier centuries than 
those which witnessed the revival of classic literature and art. 

I cannot doubt, therefore, that the play ought to be treated, 
in every respect, as one relating to sixteenth-century times, and to| 
English manners of the Elizabethan date; with just such slight! 
admixture of Danish accessories, and occasional indications of 
want of refinement, as may give it a tinge of that typical Northern 
and Scandinavian quality which the subject, and the nearly- 
buried foundation idea, of the drama, seem in some small measure 
to demand. ; 

, —In the conduct of Laertes we may certainly discover those 
_ savage impulses which at all periods have prompted men to deeds 
of blood, wherein vengeance was more thought of than justice, 
but I find in him far less of the barbarian acting under rude but 
definite laws of retaliation, than of the corrupt and conscience- 
less Italian homicide of the Borgia typé,—his base dissimulation 
and fiendish readiness to resort to poisoned weapons evidencing 
a much lower moral status than that of the ordinary Red Indian 


warrior. 
One of the marvels of Shakespeare’s art is his power of 


\ 
4 


re 


390 APPENDIX. 


imbuing the mind witli certain notions in regard to his charac- 
ters by indirect and scarcely discernible processes ; partly, some- 
times, by a subtle juxtaposition of ideas. Pleasing or wipleasing 
associations environ each character, and form the atmosphere 
within which it dwells, moving, as it were, either amidst music 
and fragrant odours, or among foul exhalations and discordant 
janglings. 

In the case of Laertes we are nowhere directly called upon, 
till near the closing scene, to view him as anything but a brave, 
honourable, and noble young man. He is singularly skilled in 
manly exercises, high in favour with the sovereign, affectionately 
regarded by his father and his sister, and so esteemed by the 


—peoplethat’ a large section of them are ready to accept him for 


their king and leader ; yet, from the beginning, a light shadow 
rests upon him, and we are not entirely surprised at the revela- 
tion of his innate worthlessness. . % 

On his first appearance he ungraciously schools his gentle 
sister, and receives from het a mild but significant rebuke ; | 
immediately afterwards, his father also addresses him in langy 
of" reproof—“ Yet here, Laertes! aboard, aboard for sh 
slightly suggesting that the son frequently erred on the a of 
punctuality. Moreover, the counsels given to him, ending so 
emphatically with a caution against being “false to any man,” 


“rather imply that those particular counsels had reference to par- 


ticular faults in the young man’s character. In a little while 
we find his morbidly subtle father devising schemes to watch 
“his conduct. at Paris, plainly indicating that he was not quite 
trusted gt home. Would any father have cared so to spy on 
Horatio 7 7 : 

His next appearance is in the character of a hot-headed rebel, 
relegated to contempt by the contrast -between his blustering rant 
and the King’s masterly coolness. We then discover him not 
only willing to enter upén the ,treacherous revenge suggested by 
another, but prepared for deeds of treachery in general, by the 
possession of the deadly unction he had bought from the mounte- 
bank. At the burial scene, again, even if we had not (then and 


REMARKS ON HAMLET. 39] 


previously) surmised some affectation in his grief, we at once dis- 
cover it in the light of Hamlet’s remarks, none the less effectively 
sarcastic because they “lack form a little.” 

Everywhere, in short, Laertes is mistrusted, blamed, despised, 
or overcrowed by some one, in spite of all his superficial bravery. 
His lion-skin is for ever blowing back, and affording glimpses of 

a the carrion wolf beneath it. 

‘Ere leaving Laertes another observation suggests itself—an 
important and typical one ;—The spectator or reader of a drama 
should never forget that information derived from the characters , 
in the play is not necessarily trustworthy information. \People 
forget this, and thaalso forget that each character can have but 
a limited knowledge in regard to the action of the drama of which 
it constitutes a part, In discussing the revenge of Laertes, one is 
apt to overlook a circumstance which slightly counts in his favour 
—that the hot-headed young man knew nothing as to the manner 
of his father’s death save what the King told him. What that was 

_ we do not learn, but there is a significant hint that no true version 
of the affair met the ear of Polonius’s son, in the words spoken by 
the King at the beginning of Act Iv. 7:—“ Now must grim 
conscience my acquittal seal. . . sith you have Heard . . . that’ 
he which hath your noble father slain pursued my life.” Whatever 
might be Hamlet’s real or presumed designs, he had certainly 
neither pursued his uncle's life nor even threatened it. 

In therquarto of 1603 it is the King that suggests and pro- 
vides}the poisoned unction. The alteration in the folio plainly 
enough denotes Shakespeare’ s intention to discredit Laertes.] . 

‘1 cannot understand Hamlet's behaviour to Ophelia. His 
sorrow at giving up her love seems real even to distraction, yet a 
short while afterwards he affronts her with obscene jests in pre- 
‘sence of allthe court. And then at her funeral, poor innocent ! his 
extravagant violence is disgusting, and insulting to her memory, 
without | any object that can be seen. 

Was Ophelia spotless? ‘I think so, though her songs seem to 
allude to seduction by Hamlet. Ophelia’s mind being strained 


392 - * APPENDIX. 


by grief at her lover’s condhct, is suddenly overthrown by the 
superadded misery of her father’s death. Her thoughts dwelling 
at the time chiefly on disappointed love, she harps on that theme 
in her madness, and she, the most modest and charming of 
maidens, sings coarse songs which she has gathered in her child- 
hood from the lips of some ribald nurse, such a one as the gross- 
minded beldame in “Romeo and Juliet.” How courtly the Lord 
Chamberlain's daughter always is! For instance, speaking of 
herself she say s— And I of ladies most deject and wretched,’— 
not, of women.’ 

[Notwithstanding the opinions held by certain German com- 
mentators, I have no doubt whatever that Ophelia was spotless. 
Tt cannot be denied that she was considered so by the characters 
in the play itself,—although, besides the songs of her real mad- 
ness, various remarks of Hamlet, in his assamed madness, to her 
and to her father, as well as the counsels and reproofs she re- 
ceived from Polonius and Laertes, tend to throw suspicion on her 
purity,—for not only do the priests, who grudge her all they 


dare, allow her at her burial “her virgin crants” and her “maiden ~ 


strewments,” but Laertes at the same time bears similar testimony, 
and, anxious as he is to make the worst of Hamlet’s offences, 
only lays to his charge—‘a sister driven into desperate terms.” 
Perhaps the contrast is specially designed, that, whereas Hamlet's 
real or fictitious madness is chiefly an exaggeration of his im- 
pulses, Ophelia’s madness largely presents the flat opposite of her 
tendencies and nature. . 
_For Hamlet's conduct on the occasions referred to there were 
_ beth his own motives and the dramatist’s separate reasons. His 
odious jesting (less odious in those coarser days than it would 
now seem, but doubtless out of place even then,—and, be it 
remarked, more foully gross in one passage than commentators 
‘seem to have discovered, judging by their far-fetched interpreta- 


tions) was prompted by the mental excitement of a crisis, an 


excitement which, so far from controlling, he purposely g gave way 

to and exaggerated. This explanation, with some adjustment, 
t 

meets the case’ of the rude sarcasms at the interview scene, as to 


REMARKS ON HAMLET. . 393 


which I fully agree with those writers who believe Hamlet to 
have become suddenly awaré*of the presence of the King and 
Polonius. Not only is this view probable in itself, but it accords 
with the ancient story, wherein the prince is made aware of con- 
cealed enemies by a most curious device, — one of his friends 
setting loose in his direction a large fly, with straw tied to its 
feet, which serves as a warning at a very dangerous moment, 
when feigned insanity is about to yield to the temptations of love. 

The dramatist may have had a subtle reason for Hamlet’s 

offensive jesting with Ophelia—namely, to demonstrate that she 
was free from evil in regard to her lover; for had it been other- 
wise, not even Hamlet would have ventured on such hazardous 
subjects. Perhaps that astute prince is to be understeod as de- 
signedly jesting so broadly, in order to suggest his innocence of 
wrong to Ophelia, as well as to indicate madness by an ostenta- 
tious change from his former manner in her society. 

I can trace no sign of “a most pure and moral nature” in 
Hamlet ; on the contrary, even in his exhortations to the Queen, 
a coarse imagination exhibits itself at every turn. Did Hamlet 
draw his “lovely, pure, and most moral nature” from his strong- 
headed father, he of the “foul crimes done in the days of nature ;” 
or from that “most seeming virtuous queen,” ‘his mother? Or 
did it pass to him from some ancestor whose virtues had also 
enriched his uncle, the “king of shreds and patches,” “a mur- 
derer and a villain?” Aquila non generant columbas.] 

i . 

‘Why ‘was Ophelia treated as a suicide, when the cause of 
her death—the breaking of a willow bough—was so perfectly 
well known? All of a piece with that barbarous theology which 
places a man’s salvation rather in some outward act than in the 
state of his heart.’ 

[I should wonder at myself for asking such a question, did I 
not know that hundreds of readers may have felt the same diffi- 
culty. Who says that Ophelia did not commit suicide? Who 
but that soft falsehood-monger the maudlin Queen ! And, as if 

- to show herself in her true colours as an arrant fabricator, she 


304 . APPENDIX. 


tells the story of the maiden’s death with such gaudy accumula- 
tion of picturesque details, impossible for her to have known of, 
that one is not surprised to find commentators terming the elabo- 
rate little speech rather poetical than dramatic. It was not 
meant to be dramatic (save as an exposition of Queen Gertrude's 
character): in confirmation of which view one finds that Shake- 
speare’s matured text is a great expansion of the corresponding 
passage in the 1603 quarto; the minute catalogue of the flowers, 
with the coarse parenthetical allusion, being added for the evident 
purpose of marking the nature of the passage: 
The priests speak of Ophelia’s death as “doubtful,” to salve 
their consciences, but the gravedigecrs assume it as notoriousthat 
there was no doubt whatever in the matter. But how strange 
an exposition of the ideas of those times, to assign moral respon- 
sibility to an insane person, and reckon that the Almighty would 
conderfin her-soul, because of a deed occasioned by His own act 
in delivering her mind to madness 7] , 


‘The Queen, with feminine deceit, conceals-her son’s secret 
by a double lie—the second part gratuitous: Ist, He is mad: 
2d, He weeps over slain Polonius.’ 

[Several false notions would never have arisen had the appa- 
rently subordinate character of the Queen been closely studied ; 
both her position,and her nature bearing importantly on somé of 

the leading personages ‘of the drama. In the ancient story she 
is the heiress of the sovereignty of Denmark, her husbands de- 
riving rank chiefly through her; and “though (as we have seen) 
Shakespeare does not entirely adopt this view of her position, 
some remembrance of it seems, perhaps unconsciously, to have 
influenced his mind, judging by certain indications furnished 
by King Claudius and Polonius The former not only speaks of 
his consort as “ the imperial Jointress to this warlike state,” words 
implying something more than a dignity derived from her hus- 
band, but he shows a deference to her, especially with regard to 
Hamlet, * which springs from stronger considerations than mere 
conjugal love. The latter displays towards the Queen not ouly 


a 


~ 


oS 


REMARKS ON HAMLET. 395 


the obsequious loyalty of a good courtier, but also a respectfully 
affectionate familiarity that seems grounded on old and intimate 
association with one who had long been possessed of independent 
importance. “Phere is something in his manner which su epests 
the almost parental and filial relationship between a veteran 
statesman and the female sovereign to whose youth.and inexpe- 
rience he had been the beloved and faithful adviser, a relation- 
ship‘which ‘could scarcely have existed unless formed previously 
. to her marriage with King Hamlet. For example— 


0 Pol. What might you [King Claudius] 
Or my dear majesty, your queen here, think?” 


And mark the familiarity of this private conversation with the 
Queen—a mature matron, be it remembered : ’ 


Pol. —‘* He will come straight. Look you lay home to him: 
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with, 
And that your grace hath screened and stood between 
Much heat and him. I'll 'sconce.me even here. 


' Pray you be round with him. .... 
Queen,—I'll warrant you. Fear me not.” 


In the same direction tends the Queen's reproof of the garrulous 
old man’s prolixity-—“ More matter with less art.” Words so 
ungracious would hardly have been used unless some playfulness 
of manner neutralised their harshness: may not we fancy them 
spoken with an air of condescending affection, as of one saying— 
Tncorrigible! shall I never teach you the limits of my patience? 
Assuming then that the Queen possessed an inherent dignity - 
‘quite apart from the rank derivable from her royal husband, we 
shall understand why her importance in the state'is greater than 
otherwise seems reasonable ; we shall comprehend how Claudius, | 
- in gaining her hand, easily supplants a nephew so beloved by the 
populace that they would not have allowed him, to be defrauded 
of a succession naturally devolving on him, and we see more fully 
the source of the influence through, which she so long” shielded 
Hamlet from her husband’s tmserupulous jealonsy. 


: 396 APPENDIX. 


But her character is what immediately concerns us ; first, as 
helping-us to estimate that of her son, who may be supposed to 
draw much of his nature from his mother; secondly, as explain- 
ing several perplexities in the drama. Laxity of moral, and pro- 
bably of bodily, fibre, is her chief characteristic. She is eminently 
passive, her soul is a stagnant pool to mirror angels or devils in, 
to receive into its bosom anything heavy enough to sink, whether 
gold or’dross. Kind-hearted she is, in an easy sort of way ; it is 
less trouble than to be malevolent. She would “hang on” her 
first husband in gloating affection, and yet, “within a month,” 
she is won to the same affection for another: “ Frailty, thy. name 
is woman,” is a true saying, indeed, as applied to her. 

Weakness, in one form or other, seems always her attribute. 
“ Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works,’— exclaims the 


kingly ghost, in commending her to Hamlet's pity. “ So-loying-— 


to my mother,” says Hamlet of his father, “that he might™ not 
beteem the winds of heaven visit her face too roughly,”—slightly 
implying that she was one of those fancifully delicate creatures 
~-who require and exact luxurious care. “ The Queen, his mother, 
lives almost by his looks :”—commendable maternal love, but the 
phrase suggests some weakness. There is little significance, per- 


haps, in any one of these passages, but in combination they help ° 


to form the moral atmosphere with which Shakespeare has sur- 
rounded this erring queep. 

But if one quality more than another belongs to such lax- 
minded harlot-hearted women, that quality is untruthfulness. 
Truth looks cold and hard, lying scems soft and kindly ; each 
truth must have its outline, lies have none, but pour from 
the sinewless soul like milk from an overturned bucket. Then 
a truth is apt to be plain and uninviting, while a lie may be made 
sumptuously beautiful in an accursed kind of beauty; and the 
flaccid steamy soul loves what it thinks pretty, and likes to hunt 
for approbation by offering it to others, And, in course of time, 
these souls can only live on lies—as an ancient opitim-eater solely 
lives on opium,—falsehood becomes truth.to them: and so they 
at length become truthful in an inverted fashion,—for they 


os 


’ 


REMARKS ON HAMLET. 397 


entirely renounce truth, which from lips like theirs would be 
nothing but the most specious sort of lie. 

Such people are the great myth-makers. No sooner is a fact 
brought to their minds than it is served like a beggar-child new 
adopted by a king, washed and combed and brushed, and tricked 
out in gorgeous apparel; then to them it becomes a recognisable 
reality, and may be complacently presented to the notice of the 
general world. , 

Such was the process to which we are indebted for the charm- 
ing description of poor Ophelia’s rash plunge into the river. The 
suicidal act was real, all the rest was mere imagination, or fiction- ~ 
founded on the barest fact. And mark how characteristic of such. . - 
a narrator—in the very midst of her dulcet poetisings she cannot 

«refrain from uttering one of the impure reminiscences with which 
her mind is loaded. 

Not dissimilar is the case of Hamlet’s tears over Polonius. 
Even so distinguished_a_critic as Lamb falls into the trap pre- 
* pared and baited by this queen’s deceitfulness, writing thus mis- 
takenly (as it seems to me):—“ The conference ended. And now 
Hamlet was at leisure to consider who it was that he had killed : 
and when he came to see that it was Polonius, the father of the 
lady Ophelia whom: he so dearly loved, he drew apart the dead 
body, and, his spirits being now a little quieter, he wept for what 
he had done.”—(Tales from Shakespeare.) 

Shakespeare’s version of the matter is scarcely so touching. 
Hamlet—at the beginning, not at the end of the conference— 
discovers whom he has slain, and_half anathematises him as a~— 

“ wretched, rash, intruding fool,” with a good deal more hard 

-,. language. Towards the close of the scene he certainly expresses 
himself “in imore humanely :—‘ For this same lord [Polonius] I do 
repent: but + heaven _hath pleased it so, to punish me with this 
and this with me::”—but’a few lines farther on he drops the dig- 
nified tone he had adopted while denouncing the Queen, falls into 
congenial sarcasm, and concludes a most sane and sagacious speech 

by brutally exclaiming, in regard to the body of Polonius,—* Tl 

_ lug the guts into the neighbour room. Mother, good night. In- 


398 APPENDIX. 


deed this counsellor is now most still, most secret, and most 

grave, who was in life a foolish, prating knave.” He then drags 

off the corpse, withthe unfeeling apostrophe-—“ Come, sir, to 

draw toward an endoftlr you.’ —— 
Now, hearken ‘to her majesty,— fair, sober,- wise :”— : 


King.—'* Where is he gone? 
Qucen. —To draw apart the body ‘he hath killed ; 
O’er whom his very madness, like some ore 
Among a mineral of metals base 
Shows itself pure ; he weeps for what is done.” 


Is not this of a piece, and of precisely equal value, with the 
florid little speech made by the same veracious lady at the burial 
scene, when, seeking to deprecate the wrath of Laertes 1— 


‘© This is mere madness : 
And thus awhile the fit will work on him ; 
Anon, as patient as the female dove, 
When that her golden couplets are disclosed, 
His silence will sit drooping.” ~~ 


Melancholy, no doubt, formed part of Hamlet’s disposition, 
but there was nothing dove-like in any corner of his nature. 
Hear the last cooings of this dove over the “ good old man” he 
has so lately slain :— 

King.—“ Now, Hamlet, where'is Polonius? Hamlet.— At 
supper. King.—At supper! Where? Hamlet—Not where 
he eats, but where he is eaten! a certain politic convocation 
of worms are e’en at him... . if you.find him not within 
this month you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the 
lobby.” “So much for Hamlet’s tears over the father of the lady 
Ophelia. 

From the unprincipled, feeble, deceitful, luxurious Queen, 
~Hamlet derives his selfishness and unscrupulous subtlety, also his 
weakness of will and general inertness, probably also a certain 
lymphatic softness of body and sensitiveness of nerve. From his 
father the King, he derives the wild, berserker violence of tempera- 
ment that underlies his polished exterior ; from him likewise are 


~ 


‘REMARKS ON HAMLET. 399 
¥ 
: inherited the courage sand aptitude, for ma ly exercisés* that so 
"greatly distinguish him.” But, “for; his ie ‘ititellect, “brooding 
imagination, and refined studiousness, we must search further 
back —possibly-to his unrecorded paternal grandfather, for the 
able illanous. ainele has m several of these respects 
“something ‘in- common “With the able but fairly honourable 
nephew. | ; 
‘King Claudius appears to possess craft, ability, and some 
share of majesty. Probably-the former king had too much used 
with his wife that “eye like Mars to threaten and command,” 
while his brother wooed her with gentleness, and that indescrib- 
able art by which some deep minds can lead others to their will 
« almost without the utterance of a word.’ 

[Hamlet says that his father was “so loving” to his mother 
“that he might not beteem the winds of heaven visit her face too 
roughly ;” but (besides making allowance for a son's natural 

- partiality in the case of a “dear father” deceased), one must 
admit that a hardy warrior-—‘ full of bread, with, all his crimes, 
broad blown, as flush as May "might have mingled roughness 
with his caresses, and made even his well-meant carefulness dis-, 
tasteful to a sensitive woman, by displaying it in a dictatorial, 
half contemptuous way. Claudius, on the other hand, could 
“smile and smile,” although a villain, and from him she met with 
sympathy and deference as well as love: “with witchcraft of his 
wit, with traitorous gifts,” he won that “most seeming virtuous 
queen.” So says the injured husband himself, and it is only 
reasonable to conclude that, to the Queen’s eyes, her first consort 
was deficient in other respects than these, in which his rival 
admittedly surpassed him. 

Claudius is very commonly regarded as a mean contemptible 
wretch in mind and body, as well as a treacherous murderous 
villain, but there is no warrant for such a notion, except in 
the assertions of ‘the two Hamlets, who could not but exaggerate 
his defects and ignore his merits. Polonius, Laertes, the various 

_envoys and courtiers, the sovereigns of England and Norway, all 


400 APPENDIX. 


treat him with a fulness of general respect which an utterly des- 
picable being would hardly have commanded, notwithstanding 
his exalted position ; and his various kingly qualities are suffi- 
ciently evident to any careful reader of the play. 

In the quarto of 1603 there are two significant differences, 
where Hamlet points the contrast between the royal brothers. 
His father he describes as possessing— 


~ * A front wherein all vertues are set downe 
For to adorne a king, and guild his crowne :" 


while of his uncle he says— 


‘* Looke you now, here is your husband, 
With a face like Vulcan, 
A looke fit for a murder and a rape, 
A dull dead hanging looke, and a hell-bred eie, 
To affright children and amaze the world. -~ 
A! have you eyes? "—— 
_In-the matured drama nothin g is said in regard to the older 
Hamlet’s “ vertue,” but merely— 
“A combination and a form indeed, 
Where every god did seem to get his seal * 
To give the world assurance of a man :” 


And, instead of the detailed condemnation of the usurper’s per- 
sonal appearance, we have only such generalised phrases: as this-— 


** Here is your husband ; like a mildew'd ear, 
Blasting his wholesome brother . 
Ha! have you eyes ?"] ” 


‘I do not think that Polonius was meant to be altogefher 
contemptible. His children both loved and respected him, and 
the people appear to have done so likewise. Nothing could be 
more wise and excellent than his counsels to his son.’ 

[This view is now so generally accepted that arguments in 
its support are needless. It should be remembered that the 


t 


REMARKS ON HAMLET. “ 401 


yeteran statesman must not be solely judyed of as he appears 
when presented to us in the decay of his faculties, and assuredly 
not as when held up to scorn and ridicule by his bitter enemy 
young Hamlet. I have somewhere met with the just remark 
that King Claudius probably owed his quiet accession to the 
throne to the exertions of Polonius,—whose influence with the 
populace was evidently considerable. (See the King’s speech to 
Laertes, (Act i, 2.)—‘ The head is not more native to the heart 
. .. than is the throne oftDenmark to thy father.”) Hence 
Hamlet’s enmity to the old lord, and his early conviction that 
Ophelia must be given up, as too dangerous on account of her 
hostile surroundings. | . 


‘Hamlet seems hardly accurate in speaking of the grave as 
the “undiscovered country from whose bourn no traveller 
returns,” seeing that his father's ghost had returned thence to 
him and revealed some of the secrets of the other world.’ 

[The contradiction is perhaps more apparent than real. No 
man who quits this world as a traveller to the world beyond the 
grave, ever returns to resume his former place ; the hopelessness 


of return, not the “ undiscovered ” nature -of-the- country;-being —- 


the subject of that particular sentence. But, indeed, so much 
confusion has always prevailed in regard to the clear separation 
of the distinct ideas of body and of spirit, that Hamlet may have 
been merely speaking conventionally of the utter annulment of 
physical existence that accompanies death, while perfectly re- 
‘ cognising the continued and active life of the spiritual part of 
man. 

No one more believes in the immortality of the soul than a 
Scottish Presbyterian, who moreover fully anticipates a resurrec- 
tion of the body, yet among the sixty-seven “ Paraphrases of 
Scripture,’—-which with the “Psalms of David,” and five 
“Hymns,” have for generations formed the only authorised 
hymnal for the Established Church of Scotland,—occurs such a 


verse as this :— 
20) 


id 


By 


7 


_. -~ing worm doth chide”—].there are. striking~ Hlustrations’of the 


402 APPENDIX. 


mt “ But man forsakes this earthly scene, 
Ah! never to return : 
Shall any following spring revive 
The ashes of the urn ?”—Puraphrese, viii. 9. 


Or, as we have jt in another paraphrase :— 
“In the eold grave, to which we haste, 
: There are no acts of pardon past : 
: "Bat fix’d the doom of all remains, 
And everlasting silence reigns.” —Paraphrase, xv. 6. 

On this subject I have recently met with a very curious 
passage in an“interesting book, entitled Cwlibun, or the ALissing 
Link, by Daniel Wilson, LL.D., ann. 1873—where, after quoting 

from an ancient Scottish ballad, in which three young men are 


represented as returning from Paradise to visit their sorrowful 


mother, but hastening away at daybreak according to the custom 
of such visitants, the writer expresses himself as follows :— In 
the confusion of ideas as shown in the birch gathered at the gates 
of Paradise, the penance dreaded_in case of their absence being 


discovered, and the chiding of the grave’s channering, or fretting 
worm, [-—“ The cock doth craw, the day doth daw, the channer- 


“undefined blending of conceptions of an immaterial existence wholly 

apart from the body, with the difficulty, as common to the mind 
of the English peasant as that of the Australian savage, of con- 
ceiving any clear realisation of the disembodied spirit, or of death 
distinct from the-‘wormy grave.’ ”—(Culilan, p. 150.) 

Few things are more: perplexing to the educated mind than 
the uneducated mind’s incapability of reason. ‘In the above case, 
however, an, at least rational, explanation of the apparent confusion 
is possible ;—a too earthly spirit might be thought of, as being 
so bound for a while by semi-material links to its former body, 
that it would be conscious of whatever affected:- the - decaying 
tenement, though no longer dwelling within it, and would find 
itself unable to escape from bondage till set free by the special 
act of Heaven. This notion has been recently held by certain 
spiritualistic writers. ] 


REMARKS, ON MACBETH. 403 


REMARKS ON “ MACBETH.” 


-.. September 1st—When reading “Macbeth” among the Rocky 
Mountains, thoughts were present to my mind which long after- 
wards shaped themselves into the following utterances,*—as ex- 
pressed in a letter to the Scofsmun, on the oceasion of the first 
visit to Edinburgh of those able Shakespearean actors, Herr and 
Mrs. Bandmann, and now extracted thence with such omissions 
and alterations as their present situation seems to require. 

‘ The vulgar notion regarding Macbeth and his queen is simply 
that the former was a murderous villain, and the latter a furious, 
diabolical termagant. It were needless to enlarge on the absurdity 
of such a view. . . . Macbeth is no common assassin, but rather 
a man of an originally noble and highly imaginative nature. 
We see the first entrance of evil, we follow its progress, we watch 
the gradual effacement of Heaven's image, even until the final 
ruin; but amidst all our hatred of the crimes—nay, contempt 
for the hypocrisies—of the tyrant, we are able to feel that he is 

._ «...uman,.ve sorrow for the victim of hellish arts, we pity him as 
he cries, grief o’erladen,— 

© T have lived long enough ;.my-way of life 
Is fallen into’ the sear and yellow leaf ;” 

or when, with a forlornnéss so absolute, he receives the news of 
the death of his ever-faithful wife. 

_ And she, that marvellous, lurid queen, she is no coarse vir ago 
—Would a blustering Eve have much prevailed on Adam at the 

, Paradisal tree 7—— but a loving, loveable woman ; oné~who can 
say—* How tender ’tis to love the babe that milks me »_(How 
did she lose her babes 1—by some soul-maddening destruction 1); 
one whose desperate daring in a single great sin never alters her 
husband’s affection and respect—f[eg. “Be innocent of the know- 
ledge, dearest chuck”]: no Regan or Goneril is she, but one of 


@* How far these ideas were original, how fur suggested by a magazine article 


read by me about that time, I cannot now determine. 


\ 
\ 


404 APPENDIX, 
. i 

“Jittle hands,” delicate of frame, altogether feminine. How 
otherwise would her whole being lave so collapsed? She is a 
pythoness possessed by the demon; utterances of more than 
mortal power proceed from this temple. of the gods; then, torn 
and shattered by the included foree, the frail fabric sinks into 
irreparable ruins. (This idea of Lady Macbeth I think to be evr- 
tainly the true one. Maleolm’s “ fiendish queen” goes for little. 
Tt is the speceh of an enemy who could know nothing of her 
secret history, and it vecurs in one of these passages whose. in- 
feriority and many contradictions mark them as belonging to 
those elieved to have been added by the hand of Middleton.) ~ 

"+. . To specify partienlar scenes: nothing can surpass that 
where Macbeth, wavering for a moment, is foreed by her inspi- 
rations tu rush on his fate— 

“Was the hope drunk wherein you dressed yourself ? 
Hath it slept since ?”’ 
or that where she stands so bravely by her husband when Ban- 
~~ —-——“quo’s “apparition uhnerves him; or, chief of all, that grandest 
scene of troubled sleep-walking, just ere the poor heartbroken 
lady sinks into that sleep which knows no unrest ;—“ Macbeth 
*doth murder sleep,” and sleep hath murdered Macheth’s queen. 
... To interpret the greab poet is no. casier than fo ex- 

plore the deepest mysteries of life and nature—a search which 
exch man will make with different lights and different powers, 
thus arriving at correspondingly different conclusions... . But 
let all who may take part in the-acting of this drama seriously 
consider the responsibility of their work ; those filling even the 
most subordinate places, reflecting how much depends on their 
eare and intelligence, and reulisiny to themselves the scenes they 
appear in, —those acting the Witches recollecting that they are for 
the time grim emissaries of the Evil One, grotesque im sin’s pro- 
per ugliness—as the hymna chuckling over his prey,—but by no 
means idiotical, buffoonish jigmakers ; above all, those personat- 
ing kings, princes, and nobles, remembering the dignity that be- 
longs to such characters, the self-respectful reserve that should 
not be quite absent even in the stormiest scenes—hands and eyes 


real 


REMARKS ON MACBETH. 405 
chary of quick movement, diction level, not porcupined with 
emphasis. A Shakespeare drama is no petty fish-pond to be tor 
mented with paltry gales ; it is a summer ocean, long sweeping 
in power-charged swell ere it’ break into the infrequent passion 
of its white and surging billows.’ —(Letter to the Scolsman, March 
28th, 1873.) e 


[‘ Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves * 
Shall never tremble) or be alive again 
And dare me to the desert with thy sword ; 
If trembling I inhabit then, protest me 
The baby of a girl.”—-(Act iii. 4.) 


In reference to the words-——“If trembling I inhabit then,” the 
Editors of the Clarendon Press Series Shakespeare write as follows : 

—* There are few passages of ouauthor which hare given rise to 
so much discussion as this. The reading aud punetuation given 
in our text [as cited above] are those of the first folio.” Besides 
varieties in pointing, the alterations and interpretations of the 
words “I inhabit then,’ are almost innumerable. “I inhabit 
then,”—“ I inhabit, then ’—“I inhibit, then ’—‘“ I inhabit thee” 
“T evade it then "—“ J inherit then "—*1 
exhibit then "—*I inhabit here,’—drembling having sometimes 
the force of a noun, sometimes of an adjective ; inkalét being 
sometimes held to signify “continuance in a given position,” 
sometimes to indicate the sense of “keep at home — abide under a 
roof,” as contrasted with wandering inadesert. (See “ Macbeth,” 
Clar. Pr. Series, p. 133.) 

Amidst this conflict of opinion, I would ask whether the word 
“inhabit” may not be used in the sense © put on— don” — 
taking habit as a term for dress, and frembling as a noun,; and 
holding the passage to, convey a metaphor similar to that of the 
Scriptural phrases—‘ clothed with cursing as with a garment,” 
“the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness?” Accepting 
this view, Macbeth would be understood to say-~“IJf I then 
put a trembling habit on—appear in the guise of a trembler,— 
declare me a weakling’s weakling.”] 


*y 


» 


ca 


4060 - ATPENDIA, 


TEMARKS ON THE “MERCHANT OF VENICE.” 


Seplember 17th‘ Finished that noble play “The Merchant 
of Venice.” Had there been a fair tribunal, and another “ second 
Daniel” to take Shylock’s part, D think the Jew would have come 
better out of it. It was. mere- quibbling to make him guilty of 
attempting the life of a citizen. You do not attempt a man’s life 
hy accusing him’ before a conrt of justice of a capital crime, in the 

same scuse as hy stabbing him with,® dagger. 

' [Ha td ‘the contract itself heen Tlexal, it would have heen, 
atmulledl on that account, and the Jew might have been punished, 
—first, for promoting & transaction contrary to law and morals,— 
secondly, for attempting a citizen’s life by means of that transac- 
tion, But, on the contrary, the validity of the bond and the for- 
mal legality of the transaction were nost distinctly affirmed— 
(Why, this bond is forfeit; and le fully uy by this the Jew may 
claim a pound of flesh.”—" Of a-strange nature is the suit you 
follow, but in such rate, that ile ve enetian Jaw cannot impugn 
you.”—“ There is no power in¥fenice can alter a decree established.”) 

—and that admitted, the State elevated the-contraét into a minor- 
law, so to speak, adopted it as its own, and became responsible for 
the consequences involved in its fulfilment. There cannot but be 
a legal, although not a moral, distinction, between attempting ae 
person's life hy legal or illegal practices. A man seeks to temove ~ 
an enemy by tempting him into dehaucheries calculated to destroy 
his existence,—is he therefure a murderer in the eye of the law! 


<i man imprisons his debtor, well knowing that grief and shane ~ 


will shortly kill him,—is he therefore a murderer in the eye of 
the law? A man compasses his neighbour's death by falsely ac- 
cusing him of a capital crime,—is even he a murderer, subject to 
the gallows? I fear not. . 

Another difficulty suggests itself—Shylock had taken no de- 
cisive steps to fulfil his presumed intention : he had not shed a 
drop of blood; he had talked daggers, but used none. Was it 
not still open for hun to say:—*T did but endeavour to shake 


REMARKS ON THE MERCHANT OF VENICE, 407 


Antonio’s fortitude by carrying matters to an extremity, even 
to the extent of triflmg with the Duke himself ;—I never intended 
any cutting of flesh ; at the last moment I should have torn my 
hound in pieces, and Tet the Christian go his way, schooled and 
humiliated ly the Jew he spurned?” 

It may be remarked as singular, that in the trial scene the 
bond is quoted as specifying—“a pound of flesh, to be . . cut off 
nearest the merchant's heart.”—-(‘ Ay, his heart: so says the bond ; 
—-Doth it not, noble judge!—... . nearest his heart, those are 
the very words. It is so:”)—~-whhile, in the earlier scene, Shylock’s 
proposal merely runs thus :--—“ Let the forfeit be nominated for an 
equal pound of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken in ehat part 
of your body it pleaseth me.” May it be supposed that this change 
was designed by Shakespeare as a conclusive proof of the Jew’s 
malignity, and in order to exclude the plea in court—that flesh 
could be cut from some parts of a man without causing loss of life, 
and that Shylock only contemplated that minor butchery? In 
conversation, at the ontset, it would have Déen at variance with 
the Jew’s friendly jesting tone, would have betrayed his purpose 
and scared away his victim, to have used other than general 
phrases ; whereas the bargain once agreed to, the wording of the . 
bond was little likely to draw the attention of the careless debtor. 

I have sometimes ventured to think that Shakespeare intro- 

. duced the words “direct or indirect "—(“ If it he proved . . . . 
that by direct or indirect attempts, he seek the life of any citizen”) 
—as an afterthought, feeling the weakness of the application to 
Shylock’s case: the’ phraseology seems alien to the straightforward 

. bluntness to be expected in an ancient statute. 

Itis a noteworthy fact that in the old stories whence the plot 
of this play is thus far very closely taken, the trial ends with the 
voidanee of the bond and: the forfeiture of the money to which it 
related, so that Shylock’s subsequent heavy doom is an incident 
framed by the. great dramatist himself. While considering what 
reasons might have occasioned so remarkable an addition, I met 
with the following passage in an essay by Mr. Watkiss Lloyd : 
—“Tn the novel the Jew’s defeat turns entirely on the matter 


o 


£08 APPENDIX. 


of the bloodshedding, which in itself is little better than a quibble ; 
Shakespeare wisely retained, and put this first to degrade the 
literal principle of the Jew to the uttermost, by exhibiting him 
foiled at the weapons of his own cunning, when wielded with 
simplicity and straightforwardness ; ... but the dignity of the 
moral . . . required and supplied the more substantial reference 
to-criminality of murderous intent.”—(SiInGER,—Dramutic Works 
of Shakespeare, vol. ii, p. 553.) 

Of one thing there can he no question——that the effect of the 
seene is enormously enhanced by the addition Shakespeare has 
sven fit to make. Jt is equally beyond question that had he 
wished to bring Shylock more legitimately within the scope of 
Venetian law he could easily have done.so. The fairness or un- 
fairness,-therefure, of the court’s proceedings must either have 
seemed to the dramatist in no way material to the interest of the 
play, or he must have deliberately framed them as unfair, from a. 
conviction that he thus came closest to the heart: of Italian nature 


at the period represented. I incline-to-the latter view, tn which 


I find valuable support in the following passage by the late Mr. 
Knight :-—“ Nor would it have been a true’picture of society in 
the sixteenth century had the poet shown the judges-of the Jew 
wholly magnanimous in granting him the mercy which he denied 

to the Christian. We certainly do not agree with the Duke, in 
his address to Shylock, that the conditions upon which his life is 
spared are iimposed— That thou shalt see the difference of our 
spirit.” Nor do we think that Shakspere meant to hold up 
tliese conditions as anything better than examples of the mode 
in which the strong are accustomed to deal with the weak. 
There is still something discordant in this, the real catastrophe 
of the drama. It could not be otherwise, and yet be true to — 
pature,’ "—(RNIGHT,—Pictorial Edition of Shalspere, Comedies, vol. 

., p. £55.) ; 

Did Shakespeare intend one of those subtle, gently melancholy 
parallels so frequent in his works, where the folly of the fool and 
the wisdom of the wise, the goodness of the good and the evil of 
the evil, ure seen te move in such closely neighbouring tracks ? 


\ 


{ 
. a 
REMARKS ON OTHELLO. ; 409 


The Jew misuses law to subvert equity, the Duke misyges equity 
to subvert law. ] / 

‘Are we to understand that Shylock, Judas-like, committed 
suicide when he left the court? There is something peculiar in 
his exclamation, “I am not well.”* A man of his stern character 
would have scorned to acknowledge any fecling of illness at such 
a time, unless he intended to end illness and health alike by 
ending his life. Besides, ie would never really hare consented 
to become a Christian, and his ready acceptance of that condition 
showed that he meant to break it,—and for that there was but 
one way.” : 


* 


REMARKS ON “OTHELLO.” 


July 10th—December 30th.—‘ Read “Othello.” Poor Desde- 
mona is scarcely at all stained with the coarseness which disfignres 
so many of Shakespeare’s heroines. How wonderfullysthe poet 
indicates the sin of Desdemona’s conduct towards her father, in 
order to mitigate our revolt against fate for dooming one so 
lovely and so innocent. Brabantio is respected and )itied 
throughout. ; 

‘Emilia is a riddle. How ingeniously she evades Desdemona’s 
questions as to the possibility of wives deceiving their husbands. 
I believe her to be intended as a woman of the world, with some- 
thing of masculine hardness and honesty in her nature, so 
thoroughly versed in the evil ways of a camp, that she could hardly 
remember whether she had ever committed adultery, or only 
talked about it as an everyday occurrence—as one speaks of eating 
and drinking. There is something meretricious in her very warm- 
heartedness ; what, it is hard to explain,—any one may have 
seen the like among ladies of a certain class. Bates’s attack on 
Sykes after the murder of Nancy, in Oliver Twist, is of the same 
type with Emilia’s attack on Othello. 

‘Bianca seems almost unnecessary. Association with her 
degrades Cassio too much. One thinks that such a man ought 


” 
‘ 


410 APPENDIX. 


” 


not to be made governor of Cyprus,—I mean, one Lapalsively 
thinks sa, while rapt iu the interest of the story, for of course 
reflection points out that the greatest dignitaries have often been 
the worst of profligates, and that fashionable immorality has 
frequently proved a raad te promotion. Nevertheless it is against 
poctic justice that a profligate should be honoured. I dislike the 
sevne where lago makes Cassio scoff at Bianca. The experiment 
js toa gross: first, becatise there was little chance that Cassio 
would abuse Bianca in such terms as in no way to indicate whom 
he spoke’ of ; secondly, hecatse Othello, however-blinded, could 
hardly have supposed that language so vile could apply even toa 
falles: Desdemona. 

[These notes were written before I had seen “ Othello” on 
the stage. IT now recognise the value of an episode, the want of 
which (with other most important passages), in the ordinary 
acting version, is almost fatal to the play, hurrying the action 
and depriving: Othello of motive for his jealousy, to’ an extent 
which shocks and confuses the spectator's anind, and degrades 
the deceived and half-distracted Moor into a ruthless unreason- 
able butcher, On the German stage (I am informed) this drama 
is never mutilated. Why should Shakespeare’s own country 
persist in treating lim so unintelligently? Surely such a poor 
“water-y ” as Bianca need not be strained at, when the play - 
itself is (happily) ingulped without objection. The scene referred 
to In sume respects parallels that of the “play... to catch the 
conseienee of the King” Gn “Hamlet ;” both being needed to 
supply motive for a deed of blood, both (as it seems to me) being 
wnperfectly conceived and executed, through haste or carelessness 
on the part of the great dramatist.] 

‘There is some similarity in the first part of the plot of “ Cym- 
beline.” Why is it that one is inclined to have more sympathy 
for Tnogen than for Desdemona? Perhaps because she was less 
foolish, and imarried a man of her own colour: for, say what 
you will, a union between a white woman and a black man is 
revolting.’ - 


[Othell 0's blackness, frightfulness, and general repulsiveness 


4 


” REMARKS ON OTHELLO, ~ 4 


are asserted or implied by nearly every personage in the play, 
including the Moor himself:—(Brubautio) “The suoty bosum of 
stch a thing as' thou, to fear not to delight” (i 2): “She in 
spite of nefure %,. . to fall in love with what ‘she Feared to lonk 
om” (i. 3): (Deke) “TE virtue no delighted beauty lack, your 
sou-turlaw is far more fate den black” G3): (Roderigo) “What a 
fall fortane does the thick-lipns owe” (i 1): (Lage) * An old Black 
van” 6.1): “The deril will make a-grandsire of you” (i-1): 
“Erring barbarian” (i. 3): What delight shall she-haye to look 
on the devil” (ii, 1): “eYcars, manners, and bevuties, all which the 
Moor is defective in” (ii,1): “She seemed to shake, and fear 
your looks" (iii, 3): Envifia}e{ Too fond of her most pilthy bargain” 
(v. 2): (Desdemona) “1 saw Othello’s visage im his mind” (i. 3): 


(Othello) “Waply for Iam buck” (ii. 3): “Her name that was - 


as fresh as Dian’s visage, is now begrimed and bluck as mine own 
face ” (iti. 3). 

In what clearer terms Shakespeare could have presented the 
idea of a somewhat uncouth, barbaric being, opposite in aspect 
to the fairness and beauty of Europeans, and physically repugnant 
to their taste,—a negro or negroid, in short,—I am at a loss to 
imagine, unless he had described his sable hero feature by feature 
in the manner of a natural history treatise. Yet most people, 


* 


perhaps, are inclined to the contrary conclusion, helding, with — 


the Jate Mr. Knight, that Othello was “one of the most noble 
and accomplished of the proud: children of the Oumiades and the 


Abassides” (Pictorial Shukspere); or accepting the dictum of the . 


usually deep-sighted poet Coleridge—that in Roderigo’s epithet 
of “ thick-lips,” we have “one, if not the only, seeming justifica- 
tion of ovr black-a-smoor or negro Othello” (utes and Lectures) ; 
while, on the stage itself, the Moor not unfrequently appears 
with a brick-dust complexion little swarthier than the counten- 
ance of an ordinary sua-burnt Englishman. No blindness so 
dense as sentimental biindness. In Germany Othello is always 


black. ; a 


— : ; 
Tt is interesting to compare “Titus Andropicts "(a play partly 
at least written hy Shakespeare), where Aaron.a “ Maar, beloved 


\ ; 


ee 


412 ° ' APPENDIX. 


hy Tamora,” is distinctly described as a negro,—adversely to the 
opinion of those declaring that even in the early seventeenth 
century a Moor could not be confounded with a low-type African 
—a confusion, by the bye, observable in the old word blecka- 
moor. It will be observed that similar terms are employed in 
characterising the aspects of Aaron and of Othello, and that the 
alleged impossibility of conceiving a high-born European lady in 
love with anegro, has not been present to the mind of the 


oo 
cf 


“author of “Titus Andronicus.” To cite a few passages in illus- 


tration :—(-faron) “ What signifies... my fleece of woolly hair 
that now uncurls even as an adder?” (it, 3): (Basstanus) “ Your 
swarth Cimmerian doth make your honour of his body's hu, 
spntted, detested, and abominable” (ii, 8): “ A barbarous Moor” 
(ii. 3): (Lavinia) “Her ruven-coloured love” (ii. 3): (Aaron) 
“What hath he sent her? Nwrse (speaking of Queen Tamora's 
child by Aaron)—~A decid... a joyless, dismal, black and sorrow- 
ful issue... avon. Is black so base a hue?” (iv. 2): (Zamene) 
“My lovely Aaron” (ii. 3): “Ah, my sweet Moor, sweeter to me 
than life” (ii. 3), Farther examples are needless. | 

‘Tt would be curious to inquire how far “ Othello ” influenced 
Goethe’s Fuust. Mephistopheles has much in common with 
‘lage, even to the .very manner of his songs and mischievous 
revels, and a likeness may be traced between Margaret and 
Desdemona. ; 

‘Ought not the passionate speeches of Othello (and other 
personages) to be cut short before they begin mighty similes 
and classical apostrophes? On first thoughts, one would answer 
—Yes. But experience teaches that. people sometimes vent their 
most real and powerful passions in grandiloquent words. It 
should be remembered that Shakespeare lived in Renaissance times, 
when Greek and Roman allusions were less hackneyed than now. 
His Jupiter, Apollo, Lethe, and Styx, may be paralleled with a 
modern subjective poet's discourse about Odin and Baldur, and 
the ash Ygdrasil—on whose branches hangs the world.’ 

[Commentators have been much perplexed by a line in Tago’s 
hitter speech against Cassio at the beginning of the play— 


ry 


om 


COMMENTS ON A SERMON. 413 


“(ne Michael Cassio,.a Florentine, . 


ellow alngst damned in @ co 
some discovering a reference to Bianca, ae @ imagining an allusion 


too gross to mention, some suggesting a change of “wife” into 
“Fife” (or “ phyz” !) while others dismiss the passage as hopelessly 
obscure. 

May not Jago’s meaning have been simply this ?}—“A man 
almost degraded into a woman (through feminine tastes and 
habits);” as when ane says—" A soldier wasted in a parson,”— 
“A farmer spoilt in a King ”;—a view supported by the imme- 
diately succeeding lines— ° 

‘That never set a squadron in the field, 
Nor the division of a battle knows of 
More than a spinster.” an 


This sense might seem clearer were the definite article employed 
—the fellow, the fair wife,—as in the phrase—“ Sinking the 
Christian in the dogmatist.” (Compare Trail. and Cress, (i. 2)— 
“There’s Heetor . . . there’s a fellvw . . . there’s a brave man, 
niece.”)] 


’ COMMENTS ON A SERMON. 


Sunday ».. .—* Mr, preached a sermon from John it, 16. 
“God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, 
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have ever- 
lasting life.” On this text he said much that was excellent, but 
one criticism I may be allowed to make, as it applies to a common 


doctrine rather than to this particular sermon. — 

‘Remarking that a mere assent to the truth of Christianity is 
not enough to ensure salvation, the preacher went on to say that 
unless a certain “change” took place a man would infallibly be 
lost. [A change of which the man himself was conscious : so I, 
rightly or wrongly,"umderstood the statement at the time.] 

‘Now this way of putting the case has drive hundreds of men 
Some who have loved and served God from their 


to desperation. 


ant theme: s 


414 APPENDIX, 


‘youth, though perhaps with Jittle fervour, must needs despair, 
Treeause they cannot’find how to set about a new sort of love and 
service, though by degrees they might easily have been taught to 
improve the old, Others again, who having been great sinners, 
have left their sins and are striving to do well, must likewise 
despair, because they are unable, perchance from lack of imagina- 
tion, to pass through the hysterical phases which they are told 
ought to aceginpany the change. [Others again; willing enough 
wz to leave their sins, are sent empty away to seek for signs and 
‘ wonders in themselyes,—which do not appear, so the hope of 
sPand the aspirant sorrowfully accepts the comprehen- 
" sesible” evils, of infil ness in preference to the incomprehensible 


os conditions of goodness. | 


‘How simple is it to say—-a “ mere assent” is not enough, but 

when an. assent Is so cordial as to influence the conduct it shows 
itself to be that very belief or “faith “ which is so much insisted 
on, Any man can know whether or not he is trying to do right ; 
and if he knows that he is trying to de right let him know that 
he has faith, though he may be unable to gange its extent or 
quality. . . 
. ‘Many men, no doubt, have passed from sin to goodness 
through a severe mental crisis, but this should he held the execp- 
tion, not quoted as the only rule, If the Prodigal Son's elder 
brother had perversely chosen to come before his father in rags, 
accusing himself of his brother's sins, and rejecting his father’s 
assurance, “Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is 
thine,” would there have been a fatted calf killed for him? There 
is mere joy in Heaven over a sinner that repenteth than over 
ninety and nine just nen that need uo repentance :”—muore joy, 
yes; but it is not said,——-more love and favonn.’ 

[In a subseynent conversation, of which I sufficiently remember 
the substance, though it holds no place in my journal, Mr. 
stated that those were wrong who taught people to pry much into 
their own hearts in order to discover whether or not they loved 
Gud, To the despondent it may be said—In such a case anxiety 
to love goes far to prove the existence of love: to those who 


b 


od 


REFLECTIONS ON PATIENCE, ETC. 415 


count such doultings admirable, and wilfully cherish them, it 
may be said—-A happily wedded couple do not waste time 
brooding over the question,—Do I Jove my wife? Do I love my 
husband? - Fhe best love is the simplest, the most spontaneous, 
the most unquestioning, . 
THough unwilling to trust to memory, I have thought it 
right to make this referenee to remarks illustrative of Mr. 


ie 
5 


“teaching, lest "my comments on the sermon should give an 
erroneous impression of its general tendency. Let me point out - - 


that in the notes referred’ to I have not offered any opinion of 
my own on the great doctrinal question of Negeneration—w hether 
the heginning of spiritual life coincides with a man’s natural hirth, 
or with his baptism, or with some conscious act of faith on Ins 
part: I merely argue that, assuming the last of these opinions to 
be true, it does not follow that a certain mode of teaching should 
be founded on it. Let me also say that though I have preserved 
these old remarks of mine because in the main I still believe them 
to be just, I amfwell aware that they touch but the surface of one 
of the mightiest and most occult of subjects. ] 


REFLECTIONS ON PATIENCE AND GOD'S 
PROVIDENCE. 


October 24th.‘ A thousand circumstances must show to every 

thoughtfil man who has learnt to trust in God, that out of present 
evil comes good, often as its distinctly traceable result. Grant 
this to be doubtful, it is still a beneficial idea for those who 
possess it; and those who do not,—as well as those whe do,— 
may proceed to- reflect that there are other interests in the world 
than one’s own, that each son has his particular portion and must 
not expect to have his brother's also. 

‘No one will deny that trials and sorrows rightly borne 
strengthen and elevate the character ; and if we deem this world 
a training school for higher states of existence (as in all probability 
it is), and if we seek. to be fellow-workers with our heavenly 


416 "APPENDIX, 


Master in the process of soul development, ought we not to rejoice | 
when the teacher, laying aside indirect methods, plainly sets before 
us sume broad and simple lesson, something that patience nist 
lear by heart and courage carry out in practice. . 

‘ Patience,—how little is this virtue thought of by men, yet 
how great its value for him who wishes to be of any worth or 
mark! If the most tedious illness or the most mortifying reverse 
teach patience to an impatient one, he will acknowledge during 
his future life that he made more way in the world through those 
seeming retrogressions, than years of bustling activity bad previ- 
ously gained for him. , ‘ 

‘One difference between God and man is this :—we, ignorant 
and weak, cahnot do good to many without injuring some; He, 
all-knowing, all-wise, all-good, so interweaves the ‘interests of his 
children, that from the very sins of the most rebellious ‘be 
‘extracts blessings for the whole family. It seems to me far more 
to the Divine honour to believe that out of man’s. contradictions 
God brings forth his own purposes hour by hour, than to suppose 
him to have created a piece of mechanism called Earth, filled it 
with puppets, wound it up and set it ju motion, and then rested 
from his labolirs and his ¢ ares like a workman glad to be rid of his 
allotted task, We can hardly hold the latter view withont making 
God The author of sin; and not merely of sin in general, but of 

every ints idual sin in particular,—an appalling idea. Better 
seems ito think that God, having willed that men be free agehts, 
‘an no more reverse his own willin this than in other respects ;— 
that consequently his power of foreknowing each individual’s life 
is the same /ii kind (though infinitely greater in degree) as that 
of an experienced man acquainted with the influences that mould 
_ human character. ‘6 


; Scie ‘Such a view enables one to discover a realness in the relations 
“between God and man which inere abstract doctrine docs nut 
exhibit. The question is no longer between an incomprehensible 
irresponsible being and wretched creatures formed for an obligatory ~~ 
crawl each in its évwin track, but between an all-perfeet father and 
his weak and erring children; the children owing their father 


COMMENTS ON BUNSEN’S HIPPOLYTUS. 417 


, 
obedience, the father owing the children protection, and bound 
by the same moral laws that bind them—laws which, having their 
origin in his own nature, cannot be laid aside or-superseded ;—the 
children free to he either good or evil according to their own 
choice ; the father rejoicing in their good band sorrowing in their 
evil with real man-like joy and man-like grief, and with real man- 
like pleasure tnhancing the happiness “of Heaven by displaying to 
the ages to come the wonders of his many-sided wisdom in ruling 
the world ; and finally triumphing with man-like triumph when. 
“cometh the end”——the end of the present stage of this world’s 
development—perchance of every planetary world that also circles 
round our sun—and “all things are brought under ‘iris fect,” and 
our whole universe, delivered from sin and sorrow, is restored to 
perfect order, happiness, and love.’ [In copying these pages of my 
journal, I'am led to reflect how far the views expressed in the later 
part of them are true or probable... I think them probable, but 
have Jess than my former unqualified confidence in their truth. 
Every year of life teaches us, in lessons of growing force, owr own 
profound ignorance of all that belongs to the world unseen. I do 
believe in the entire benevolence of God, and accept the inevitably 
resulting conclusions in regard to the ultimate victory of good over 
evil, but some of my old remarks seem to me rather tob un- 
conditionally presented. Be that as it may, the suljects discussed 
.are worthy of consideration ; I therefore preserve my own Teflec- 
tions on them, offering them, however, rather as indications for a 
line of thought, than as conclusions whigh“I am ready to maintain 
by argument. ] 


a 


Ke 
COMMENTS ON BUNSEN’S “ HIPPOLYTUS.” 


Sunilay, Junuary 15th—! Reading Bunsen’s Hippolytus.* This 
is a most interesting book, establishing clearly, as might be sup- 
posed, tlle Uifference between the Primitive Church, “and that of 
Rome on the one hand, or those of Protestantism on the other. 

‘The baptism of- infants appears to have been unknown for 


_ * Bunsen (GC. C. Jj, —~Hippolytus and His Age. London, 1852. 
25 . 


418 APPENDIX. | 


several centuries, and that of children, ever! to have been of com- 
paratively Jate introduction, confirmation and baptism having 
previously heen held inseparable. 

‘The Eucharist appears neither to have been viewed as a 
repetition of Christ's sacrifice with the accompany ‘ind phenomena 
of transulstantiation, nor as a mere commemorati rite, but as 
possessing a peculiar grace in its power of drawing closer the 
mystic bond of union between Christ and believers, who im their 
consciousness of that incorporation spiritually offered themselves 
up as living sacrifices to God ; and thus, evidently in consequence 
of this act of special communion with Christ, the early Church 
ordained that prayer at that period of the service should not he 
offered directly to the Son, but to the Father,—as coming from the 
whole Church inclusive of Christ as its head. a 

‘The minute definitions of the Athanasian Creed, oféven of 
the Nicene, are by no means in accord with primitive views, which 
without any parade of a separation of the Divine Persons of the 
Trinity at the same time that their unity is asserted, made the 
separate personality of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost 
peculiarly distinct ; appearing to treat this as the practical part 
of the doctrine, while the nature of the union of the second and | 
third blessed Persons with one another, and with the eternal Gou- 
head of the Father, seemed to be regarded as a subject for devout 
speculation. ’ 

To the simple believer of primitive times Christ appeared in 
no sense identical with God the Father, but as his eternally exist- y 
ent son, the special lord of man ind man’s world ; 3 and the, Holy 
Spirit was viewed as the Divine medium of communion between 
Father and Son, thé revealer of God to man’s,spirit’from the be- 
ginning, and the perpetual manifester of Chyist-inqnd by the 
Church. Each Divine personality had therefore his own peculiar 
place i In worship, and there was none of that strange confusion so - 
. frequently found in modern devotional exercises, particularly i in ex: 
temporaneous prayer. © ; 

‘In the Apostolic Constitutions we find a considerable amount 
of: information on the domestic habits‘and modes of thought 6f 


COMMENTS ON BUNSEN’S HIPPOLYTUS. - 4149 

a . 
primitive Christendom, as well as on their religious and ecclesias- 
tical rales. , ; _ 

‘Tt is worthy of notice that a bishop is forbidden to form a 
second marriage, or to marry a widow, a divorced woman, a 
slave, or a person of bad repute, oy to,marry his first cousin, his 
niece, or his deceased wife’s sister,—suchemarriages being less 
esteemed. The prohibition of any second marriage, would 
necessarily include marriage with a deceased wife's sister, but such 
alliances being mentioned in connection with others knownk to be 
lawful, proves that these also were held lawful, though perhaps 
inexpedient:” This is Bunsen’s opinion, and one which it would 7 
be difficult to controvert., ‘ 

‘In regard to Sabbatical observances, the early Church conse- 
erated bot Saturday and Sunday, the former in commemoration 
ofthe Creation; the latter of Christ’s resurrection. - Masters aré 
enjoined to free their servants from work on those, day's, that they 
may have leisure to receive instruction in the faith; the whole” 


‘community are desired to celebrate the Eucharist on Sunday (and. 


indeed on every occasion of mecting for religious purposes) ; and 
anathemas are. pronounced against any oné who shall keep tle 
Lord's Day as a fast instead of a festival. . a 

- «The possession of slaves was not reckoned unchristian; on the _ 
contrary, is was regarded as in the natural order of things, and 


various regulations were framed accordingly: 
‘These opinions and practices of the early Church need not be- 
thought of binding obligation on us, if we hold (and this also in.’ , 
accordance with that primitive Church) that Christianity Is a « 
principle of action rather than a system of dJaws;‘and that: God's 
Spirit is always present to guide the collective body of believers - 
into such: observances and opinions as are suitable to the times in, — 
which they live; but though not binding on us they ought to | 
have a certain influence in regulating our views, and more especl: | 
ally in saving us fromundue respect-for churches and doctrines— ~ 
whether Protestant or Roman,-—whose claims have been founded a 
either on an antiquity presumed to extend to Apostolic days, but’ | 
now ascertained to be as far removed from that period-as we are 


,, 
‘ 


420 . APPENDIX. 


from the dawn of the Reformation; or on aghelastic deductions 
from certain passages in Scripture to which the immediate pupils of 
the Apostles attached a very different and much freer significance.’ 


. & 
& LETTER FROM THE REV. THOMAS WOOLSEY.* 


” 


“WESLEYAN Mission, Epsonton House, ° 


“October 18, 1860. 


“As the humble representative of the Wesleyan, Missionary 
Society in these parts, allow me torfeel honoured by your Lord- 
ship's favourable recognition of my predecessor, as set forth in the 
accompanying paper, taken from the Wesleyan Missionary Notices 
for April last, and Copied from the Church of Scotland Missionary 
Record. The same in substance appeared in the Nor’ Vester of 
Jan, 2d. - 

[“CRIsTIAN FAMILIES AMONG THE InDIAN Tripys.—The 
Earl off Southesk, during his reént hunting expedition in the 

Rocky Mountains, fell in with about twelve families of Assinthoines 
or Stone Indians (very wild and savage as a tribe), who professed 
Christianity, and, so far as he coukl judge, were acting up to their 
profession. These families w exe far from any missionary station, 
and had not even seen a missionary for many years. Still they 
showed a considerable acquaintance with Scripture, and were 
regular in their morning and evening devotions. At their earnest 


request, his Lordship wrote out for them several passages of 


Scripture. Their knowledge of religion is supposed to have been 
imparted by the Rev. Mr. Randall (Rundle), a Wesleyan missionary 
who went to Fort Edmonton in 1839, and left the country in 
1847, on account of ill health; they have, however, a regular 
teacher in one of themselves, who has been set apart by them for 
that purpose.” —Record Newspaper] 

“The Stone Indians are, without doubt, exclusively indebted to 
Mr. Rundle, under God, for 2 the religious instruction they 
primarily received, as he devoted himself most assiduously to them 


* See page 355. 


fe 


LETTER FROM REV, THOMAS WOOLSEY. 421 
during his eight years’ sojourn in the Saskatchewan ; and it is a 
yreat satisfaction that any of them retained what they had 
previously received, after being without a missionary from 1848" 
to 1855, when { entered upon the duties of this peculiar section 
of John Wesley's parish—that veneralle man’s motto being, ‘ The 


world is my parish.’ 


~RE ‘ oy . 
i ‘But your Lordship’s statement conveys the idea that I have, 


to a certain extent, been ‘at ease in Zion, at least in regard to 
some of that interesting portion of the aborigines—not designedly 
Tam aware, but I fear that your Lordship has been misinformed, 
as I saw the very Assiniboines geferred to last February, when they 
expressed their high appreciation of your Lordship’s kindness to 
‘them; and these are the very families whom I have visited 
frequently since 56. They may have expressed themselves in 
regard to not having seen a missionary since Mr. Rundle left 
until they met with me; but I think that is all they could say ; 
so that your interpreters mfist have misunderstood ‘them, and, 
consequently, misled your Lordship. 1 would not be so positive, 
as it is possible for a few families to have escaped my notice, if I 
had not met with the same Indians last February, and recognised 
them as the very individuals I had often seen previously. Thgve 
visited them near the mountains every winter for three years past, 
and actually travelled far to sce a few straggling families that 
were not with the main hand. During two visits paid to them, 
between Ghost and Bow Rivers, I baptized 116 adults and‘196 
children, besides solemnising 28 marriages. 

“The above remarks have been made simply by way of explana- 
tion, and without the least design of casting any reflection upon 
yout Lordship’s observations, and which, ] have no doubt, will be 
appreciated by a sincere lover of ‘the truth, the whole truth, and 
nothing but the trath.’ 

“ As your Lordship may probably feel interested in a narrative 


of events connected with this remote spot, I will endeavour to 


furnish a few of the more remarkable itemns. 
“In September '59, I enclosed a few letters to your Lordship, 


designed for transmission from Carlton House to Red River, but 


‘ 


iy 


422 APPENDIX. 


had the mortification to learn, in a month or two, that the letter- 
carrier had thrown the whole of the mail into the Saskatchewan. 

“The summer of '59, we have since understood, was a some- 

what disastrous one to many persons in the Territory, through the 
loss of the chartered ship Kitty, nearly all mission and private 
orders being on board of her. Several of my consignments are 
amongst the missing. The past twelve months have also proved 
very unpropitious to this mission, as the Sarcees have stolen two 
of my horses, two others have died from natural causes, and one . 
has been devoured by the wood wolves. Occasional skirmishes 
have taken place amongst the different tribes, in which all have 
suffered more or less. Killed and wounded may be reported 
amongst the Blackfeet, Blood Indians, Sarcees, and Crees. In 
fact, a freeman was killed by the Sarcees last August while I was 
with the Crees and freemen. I shall not soon forget the excesive 
grief manifested as his friends brought his bloody corpse to the 
camp. Several horses were stolen,—mine amongst the number, 
although T subsequently recovered them, on payment of about 
£6 sterling. Crime has to be rewarded in these parts. 

“Last month an unusual occurrence took place at this fort, a 
Cree deliberately shooting a Blackfoot chief and scalping him near 
the very spot where your Lordship and I-took leave of each other. 
The fort gates were instantly closed, lest the Blackfeet should 
take. revenge upon the whites. In fact, three of the .Company’s 
employés, who were just coming from the boat, were laid hold of 
by the Blackfeet, but by an almost superhuman struggle escaped, 
and ran for their lives. Two days after, a few Sarcces crossed 
the river, and had just seated themselves on the opposite bank, 
when a war party of Crees, from Fort Pitt, fired upon them, and 
killed one instantly,.and scalped him. The others threw away 
their robes, and fled? wounded, it is supposed, as several bullets 
had passed through their roles. 

“Tt is well that your Lordship went through the country last 

year, as it would have been unsafe this season. An eniinent 
traveller has judiciously observed, in regard to the Indians, that 
‘in time of peace,'no greater friends ; in time of? war, no greater 


7 a _ 


THE CREE 


SYLLABIC CHARACTERS, TERMINATIONS, &c. ° 


Lb.jger PY LO >| rhe Great Spint. 
TQ. land again, or more | Lf Lo. D |The Evil Spirit. 
PA. river OVe - Aman. 

, .| A woman. 

-| A boy 

A girt 


An fntant 
A buffato 


A moose. 


id CAN your father 1A red deer 


{ 
IDCAGA/s or her father 


.| A bear 


| 


% This, at the top of.a character is equivalent to i,viz WE (Aa-Awi), If the dot were 


' 
1 


t 
fi 
i 


not at the top, tt would simply be ka-kwah. 
+ As there are no labials required for the language the above signs are used for 


Land pr when proper names are introduced: thus 13.4 ( Mary}; C&.( Pilate). 


* 
INDIAN NAMES 


*ihe names represent most of the terminationa/ points. The aoove 


names have their respective signitications, thus No.6’ Mas-ke-pe-toon, 
ad. me a 
the. broken arm, 8, Mes-la-tem, the horse; /2 Mas-kwa-chak, the bear’ spirit, 


Amy 


/3, Wa-pe-sew, the swan. a 


a: 


. kas | kes thos | Aas 


< 
A) Re 
Chas \shes 
yi fs 
mas | es 


TE 


Nas } nes 


0.4 G. 


sas | ses 


Yat Bh 
yas yes 


4,| Ss 


5% Commend- 
-men 
p Unf dea 
Ta. Pea: 
PPP GL 
PPod-P V 
dC 4a Fe 
bavard, 
PALO - 
fire 
6™* Commandment 
QLay 
foo <cée 
74tommandment 
QLA?7 
Poaréat - 


8**Commanament 


OLAY 
PEEL A> 


*The orthography 7s as follows: “Kes-tz-ye-mek | ko-ta-we 


“mena. ke-ka-we: ke-ke-se-ka-ma ke-ta’) he~ken-wa-hee 


a-ho-fa as-heehk, ka Te~pa-yeche-hat-heé Ma-né-toom ka 


me-yesk” 


Aech | koch| Kach 


a 


Edmontan House, © Thos Woolsey, 


Aug. /2™ 1859. Wesleyan Missionary. 
io 


ay 


n 


" 


a 


u 


w 


LETTER FROM REY. THOMAS WOOLSEY. S498 


* enemies.’ Yes, then their “parbarity i in- proypbial—ther hatred 
implacable. 
—. # When with the Crees last Angust, I visited, the locality re- 
_ howned for having a large piece of iron there. In fact, an adjoin- 
ing Jake and.a‘ rivulet bear the respective designations of Iron 
Lake and Iron’ Rivulet.. s-Well, there the iron is, as pure as pos- 
sible, and as sgnorous as an anvil, and weighs, I should judge, 200 
Ibs. It is on the summit of a-mound, but whether it is a meteoric 
phenomenon or indieative of iron in that section, I cannot 
SBYo 0. . 
“ J ust as I am | finishing this lette? a -messenger has 
arrived from'Fort Pitt, with tidings: of a war'party of Blackfeet 


feowaerree 


Blackfeet fell in the struggle — 


“T. WOOLSEY, 
“ Wesleyan Missionary.” 


men 


one 


o 


} INDEX. 


~~ 


A 

Africa, the, passage out in, 2. 

Aiktow River, or River that turns, 
75, 77. 

Anderson, Bishop ‘of Rizpert’s Land, 

. resident at Fort Garry, exchanges 
visits with authbr, 32, 351 ; Pro- 
testant cathedral described, - 33; 
summons a meeting on revivals, 
and invites author to speak, 
352; preaches Mr. Mackenzie’s 
funeral sermon, 356 ; preaches at 
St. James's, — his tolerance of 

_ children in church, 362 ; author’s 
farewell acknowledgments: to him 
and Miss Anderson, 364. o-+-, 

Anderson, Captain (aftervgids Sit 
James), 2, 371, 

Ans Northup, arrival of thes 34, 

Antelope, See Cabree, 

Antoine Blandoine, a French half- 
breed: engaged as a hunter and 
guide, 159; shoots ducks, 171 ; 
his enthusiasm, 180 ; on Auroras, 
183; makes a fishing-rod, 189 ; 
stalks sheep and goat, 191, 192; 
shoots a ewe, 196; assistsin raising 
a cairn, 196; chases grisly with 
author, 197; shoots sheep with 
author, 198, 199; his quaint 

' Tifle, 199 ; his appearance, 204 ; 

sheep stalking with author, 205, 

206 ; shoots a fine ram, ete., 209- 

214; his “ arrangement” of the 

slain, 213, 214; meets author 

with horses, 220 ; doubtful as to 
track, 224; goat-stalking with 


» 


author — retum in the dark 
227, 228-; sheep-stalking, 231, 
239; shoulders a ewe, 240 ; goat- 
stalking with author—dangerous 
climb, 240, 243; hunts, and 
fords Bow River with author, 255, 
256; farewell, 269. 


Ariwakenha, Thomas, See Toma. 
Assiniboine River, St. James's Epis- 


copalian settlement on, 33, 362; 


vale of, 50; the. Qwappelle a 


tributary of, 66 ; might be joined 
to South Saskatchewan, 76 ; camp 
by, 320 ; breadth of, at Fort pret 
322 ; hunting of deaver on, 332 
settlement along banks of, "348." 


Assiniboines, See Indians. 
Athabasca River, mountains near its 


“goureey-L72, 173,180, 193- 221, 

352 ;- Pembina River, 170, “ahd 
M'Leod River, 175, its tributaries; 

Medicine Tent River one of its 
chief head-waters, 193, 201,221 ; 
height-of-land between its waters 
and those of North Saskatchewan, 
201, 221. 


Aurora Borealis, 183, 274, 297, 


298, 308. 
B 


Bad Hill, 110 e¢ seg.; features of 


country near, 113, 126, 127. 


Badgers, 56, 103. 

Ballantyne, Mr. R.. M., quoted, 5, 
Baptist, an Iroquois voyageur, 5. 
Batile River, 266. 

Bear Lake, 134. 


* 
, 


af 


426 INDEX: 


Bear, Black, shot by James Mackay, 
24; track seen, 144; Yun near 
Red Deer River, -265, 

Bear, Grisly, hunted by author on 
Bad Hill, 108-120; female and 
cub seen, 111; male wounded 
by author, 112—found, 116—~ 
measurement of his skin, 117—~ 
hideons human aspect when 
skinned, 117; tracks of, human 
in form, 116; anecdote of Indian 
kiled by, 110; male shot from 
horseback by Tait, 119 ; immense 


his comrades 130; very thin— 
exchanged at Fort Pitt, 140, 141. 


Birds, taiéness of one, 144 ; sing- 


Bison, or Buffalo (American Bison), 


kin at Fort Carlton, 131; said | 


to be plentiful in the Rocky 
Mountains, 167;. hunted by 
author, but. makes off, 197; met 
by Short, 206; best mode of 
shooting, 206 ; traces of digging 
for roots seen, 209, 234, 238; 
track seen, 222 ; habit of eating 
mice, 266 ; anecdote of fight with 
four buffaloes, 289,—of two In- 
dians driven into a tree by, 290, 
292, 

Beaver Creek, 50,- 

Beaver Hill Creek, 314. 

Deaver, trees cut down by the, 271, 
267; meat, 181, 186, 3382, 

Bichon, 2 yellow-dun pony;a buffalo- 
runner, once belonged to Nahtooss, 
a Blackfoot chief, 43 ; described, 
‘43 ; his trick of neighing, 50, 73, 
91; runs a wolf, 71; sufferings 
from gad-fies, 72 ; amusing pe- 
culiarities, 72, 73, 1275 runs 
pull, 80 ; ‘his merits, 81; cleverly 4 


avoids a charging bull, 84, 85;  eghiGt= POF 80 ; bull run and shot,, «. 
0; two bulls shot, 64, 855°. 


after the great ; herd—cow shot— 
fine bull run to hay, 91-96; 
runs cows—comes ‘down on his 
head —instinct for home, 104- 
107 ; goes to Bad Hill, 108 ; 
unsaccessfully runs an ox, 118; 
hoofs worn, 129 ; swims tu meet 


* 


\ 


ing of numerous, 26, 41. ~ 


described, 91: Buus, their weight 


“and size, 91; thickness of skull, 


80 ; generally lean in July, 80, 
93; awkward and grotesque, 85 ; 
sometimes dangerous, 85, 103 ; 


lion-like when old, 118 ; will face * 


a, grisly bear, 289, 290 ; size of 
horns, 96 ; horns often broken, 
93, 96, 289; wallows, 96, 97, 


. 255 ; rutting season, 123 ; sound 


of roaring, 92, 123: Oxey, 105, 
118: Cows, swifter and-harder to 
approach than bulls, 92, 109; 
fierce when at bay, 121 : Caves, 
52, 106, 117, 12%: BurraLozs 
(UNCLASSIFIED), quality of meat, 


51,80, 123; dungused for fuel, 67; 


meat driéd, 100, etc. ; pemmican, 
800, ete; meat on stages, 295, 
325 ;-go in vast herds, “92, 109, 
355; once common in Rocky 
Mountains, 254; becoming scarcer 
every where,./255, 285 ; ‘food in 
winter, 317; can be domesti- 
cated, 52; annual great hunts of, 
hy half. breeds, 30, 40; Fort 
Ellice men hunting~—tongues and 
live calves brought in— tame 
heifer, 5I, 5Q; bull seen, 69; 
plain strewed with skulls, 70; 
herd driven across Saskatchewan 
by Indians, 77, 78; old ‘bull 


vast hérd sighted, _— hunted — 
several bulls shot—~-author shoots 
fat cow, and bull with very fine 
horns, 91-95 ; bull receives four- 
teen shots, 96-98 ; herd stalked 
on foot, 102, 103; herd guided 


My 


by half-breed, 104; cows run, 
104-106 ; great herd on way to 
Bad Hul, 109 ; bull struck at by 
grisly, 112 ; cows stalked—bull 
protects cow, 114, 115 ; cow with 
new-born calf—cow and bull 
shot, 117-119; Mackay and 
M‘Beath shot nine cows, 119; 

"harness carved from bull, 119, 

-. 120;-author shoots a very fine 

5 COW; "191, 122; calf hunted by 
wolves, 123 ; bulls roaring round 
camp, 123; summary of sport, 
126 ;.Mr. Vanderbirt sees, fresh 
killed one, .160 ; 
the Rocky Mountains, 254, 255 ; 
anecdote of bulls and grisly bear, 
288, 290; a few bulls seen 
during winter j Journey, 295, 296, 
298, 306. 

Bittern, The, 23, 42. 

Dlack, Rev, Mr., Free Church min- 
ister at Fort Garry, 353, 357. 

Black, ‘a large well- bred horse, 
37, 465, 75, 84, 91, 95, 104, 
134, 140. ‘ 

Blackfeet, See Indians, 

Black MudtHill, 143. 

Blakiston, “Captain, RA, 9, 114, 
256, 

Blandoimé?” See Antoine, 

Blind River, 265. 

Blood Indians. See Indians, 

Blond, alias M‘Gillis, a handsome 
chestnut cart-horse, 41, 109, 270, 
299 ; \ falls down om ice-bank, 
229, 

Boat-tents.described, 15. 

Bow Fort, Old, a deserted fort on 
Bow River, 252, 255, 256, 

Bow River, "the chief - head-water 
of the South Saskatchewan, the 
party find right road to it from 
Kootanie Plain, 236 ; cross height- 
of~land between its water-shed 


. 


aed 


, 


INDEX, > | _ 


skulls, ete,, in’ 


497 
and that of “North Saskatchewan, 
237 ; arrive at river itself, 244 ; 
its valley, 250 ; fineness of the 
trees, 250; author and Antoine 
cross and recross, 255, 256 ; fine 
trout caught, 256. 

Boyd, Mr., an English traveller, 30, 

Brazeau’s Cache, 17 76. 

Brazeau River, 193. 

Brazeau, Mr., Fort. Edmonton, cordi- - 
ally receives author, 146 ; gives - 
him information on Catlin’s state- 
ments, 151, 159 ; on missionary 
work, 154 ; on the Blackfeet and 

_other Indians, 154, 159-165; 
on Pe-toh-pee-kiss, a Blackfoot 
warrior, 160-163. 

Bridgeman, Mr., Fort Garry, 30. 

Buffalo. See Bison. 

Buffalo Creek, 170, 172. 


Buffalo robes, 52, 276, 307. * 
Bullets. See Guns. 
Bulwer, See Lytton. 


Bunn, Dr., Fort Garry, 30. 


Cc 

Cabree or Prong-horned Antelope 
(Antilope furcifer), 57, 113; 
stalked, etc., 56, 66, 67, 69, 79, 
84, 109 ; head and horns of, 83, 
84. . 

Cameron, Mr., Lachine, 5 

Camp-fite, tales of magic round, 81; 
glory of, in deep, narrow glen, 
190 ; 3 comfort of, in snow-storm 
in ‘the mountains, 217; com- 
_panionable party over, 273 3 art 
of building, 305 ; crushed by the 
intensity of the cold, 3IBF > re- 
- viving effect of, 317 ; icicles close 
Veside, 336; fragrance and beauty — 
of, among snow-clad pines, 337. 

Canoes, of skin, 87, 88]; of india~ 
rubber, 14, 24. | 

Cardinal, Mr., superintendent of 


» 
ip 


7 


428 INDEX. 


. ‘Quappelle Fort, 59 ; _—M. André, 
of St, Ann, 169, 17H 175. : 

Cariole,—for dogs, deserihed, 334; 
‘a disagreeable vehicle, 337, 343, 
344; Mr. Murray’s, "321 :—for | 
horses, Mr. Murray's, 328 ; James 
M‘Kay’s, 349, 

Carlton, Fort, on the North, Saskat- 
chewan, described, 132 ; officer- 
in-charge, Mr. Hardisty, 127 ; 

‘"Intn employed there, 285 ; fertile 
country near, 129, 133, 301; 
hunters from, joined by author's 

- party, 99-127 ; author's arrival 
—~stoy—visit ta horse-guard and 

‘ store — departure, 127-133 ; 
author's return —stay—arrange- 
ments about horses (mare noosed), 

~~ ete,,—departure, 298- 301. 
Carts, Red River, 13, 20, 23 
Catlin, on canoes, 87 ; on weight. of 


 pnffado bull, 91; on “ wallows, an) 


“ -96, 97; statements about the 
' Mandans, 151 ; portrait of Pe-toh- 
pee-kiss, 160 ; ou dog-trains, 294, 

Catholics, Roman, at Fort Garry,— 
Bishop of St. Boniface—nunnery, 
82, 33 ;* mission at Lake St. 

BN, 167-169 ; ; public’. contro- 


“sersy with Protestant, 331; priest | 


"martyred, 342 ; mission at’ Oak 
Pofht, 347; church at White 
Horse Plains, 348; population 


at Red River Settlement, its dis--| 


. tribution, —nunnery,—~cathedral, 
« 361, ‘See Missions. 


Cendré.(Mission); a roan -cart-horse, |, 


169, 333; wounded by a fe. 
branch, 926. 

Cendré (Sinclair), a favourite roan 
horse, got in exchange at ‘Fort 
Pitt, 140, 141 ; hind foot burnt 
in smoke-fire, 143 ; exchange of 
for red-dun horse refused, 157, 
1585 yefreshed by rest, 187; 


runs a bear, 265 ; strays, 304 ; 
runs a fox in the snow, 306 ; 
suffering from winter journcy, 
317 ; gives out—gallantly rejoit 
the party, 318, 319 ; again stops 
on the road,.321 ; brought j in by 
an Indian, 327; finally left at 
Fort Pelly, 333. 

Chastellain,. Mr., superintendent ats 
Fort Pitt, 285; hospitably 
receives author, 285 ; presents 
him with an Indian dress, 286 ; 
tells him various anecdotes, 286- 
291, 

Cherry Bush, encampment at, 103, e¢ 
seg.; country between itand Bad 
Hill, 109 ; bear-hunting expedi- 
tion "from, 108-118, 

Chicago, 6. 


| Chipeweyans, See Indians. 


Christie, Mr., chief officer of Saskat- 
chewan district, 268 ; temporarily 
absent from, Edmonton, 147; 

" hospitably entertains author, 268- 
272 ;.helps him in arrangements 
about horses, 269 ; lends ‘hint his 
boat, ‘the “Golden . Era,” 273; ° - 

~ author's farewell to, 273. 

Qold, intensity of the, on homeward 
journey, 274, 282, 283, 284, 294, 
296, 297, 313, 315, 317, 336, 
344, 351, 367 ; ‘below zero 
(Pahrenkieit), degrees observed or 
supposed, 296, 300, 323; cir- 

- ‘eumstances iustrative of, 313, 
336, 367; considered the severest- 
opening of winter ever known, 
"323,256 ; death of Mr. Mackenzie 
oceasioned by, 356. 

Colville, Fort, 369. - 

Cranes, 26, 69. . 

Creek, Long Lake, 69. . 

Crees. See Indians. - 

Crow, 70; the piping, 223. 

| Crow’ Indians, See Indians. 


INDEX. 


Crow-wing, City, Minnesota, 7, 12, 
368 ; River, 15, 19, 368 ; Indian 
nanie, 15. 

Conard, Sir Edward, Bart., 371. 
Cynthia Huntera—flight of butter- 
flies snpposed to be, 222, 

Cyprés Hills, 78. 


D 


- Dag-patiern, knife, of the, 164, 165. 

Dalhousie, Earl of, mountain named 
after, by author, 222. 

Deer, Black-tailed;~ or Bounding 


' (Cerius madyotis), 111, 113, 255, 
263, _ 
Delaware vale, kcenery of, 3. - 
De Smet (Father), missionary 
travels, 154, 156. 
Detroit, 6. , 


Deux Rivities, 26, 27, 367 ;—tribu- 
taries of M‘Leod River, 173. 

Dickson, Mr., rifle made by, 38, 116, 
ete, - 

Dogs, description of Indian sleigh- 
dogs, 152, 337; some of them 
demi - wolves, 163; sometimes 
castrated, 153; their idleness in 
summer, 132, 183; value and 
‘usefulness in winter, 154, 293, 
339; voracity and impudence, 
139, 152, 260,; noisiness, 123, 
153, 2113 ci nelties practised on 
them, 338 ~ 340 ; dog - drivers’ 
language, 337, 338 x vehicles 
drawn by” “them—carioles, 334, 
344, sleighs or sleds, 334, etc., 
trains or travailles, 63, 294. See 
Hector, Pointer, Whisky. 

Dog River, 263. 

Don, va, Bay. horse, 10, 16, 20, 26. 

Dieés—Half- breed, Indian, etc. 

“ notices of dress of —J ames M'Kay, 
9; Ojibways, 28; nuns, 32; hunters 
and their wives, 44,45 ; Nummé, 
53 ; Indians near Qu’ appelle Fort, 


See . 


429 


59-63; Napesskes, 108; Sioux, 
163 ; Iroquois’ wife, 176 ; leather 
dresses, 171; mountain dress of 
party, 202-205 ; Blackfeet, 271 ; 
Blood Indian woman, 288 ; winter 
dress of party, 292; Half-breeds 
of White Horse Plains, 348. 

Duck Bay, 340. 

Ducks, Wild, shot, etc., 16,17, 27, 


42, 46, 48, 137, 142, 171, 265,. © 


268, 273; flights of, down the 
North Saskatchewan, 273 ; Black 
. Diving-ducks, 190, 

Duncan Robertson,a Perthshire High- 
lander ¢ accompanies author from 
Scotland, 5; furms one of expedi- 
tion from, Fort Garry, 35 ; runs 
a buffalo, 85 ; Vait-fshing in Sas- 
katchewan, 87 ; chases wolves, _ 
101; with author to the Bad 
Hill, 108-116 ; assists in raising 
a cairn, 196 ; hunts wild sheep, 
198 ; appearance of, in the 
mountains, 203 ; climbs moun- 
tain with author, 246; in the 
“Golden Era,” 274; winter 
garb, 292 ; helps Cendré forward, 
318; returns to England with 
author, 371. 


Ez 


Eagle Creek, 90, 111, 113. 

Edmonton, Fort, on the North Sas- 
katchewan, the Company's chief 
post in the district, described, 
147 ; officerin charge, Mr.Christie, 
268 ; temporarily in charge, Mr. 
Brazeau, 147 ; in charge in 1874, 
Mr. Hardisty, 300 ; its agriculture, 
148, 286 ; number of men em- 
ployed there, 285; scarcity of 
provisions, buffaloes deserting 
neighbourhood, 100, 133, 255, 
285; author's arrival stay — 


430 


conversations with Mr. Brazeau 
and Rev.T. Woolsey —engagement 
of guides, arrangements about 
horses, exchange of carts fur pack- 
saddles, 147-165; departure, 
166 ; ‘return — stay ~~ arrange~ 
ments about horses—message’ to 
Mountain Assiniboines—visit of 
Blackfeet, 268-272; departure 
in the “ Golden Era,” 273. 

Elbow the, See Saskatchewan. 

Electrical flame from robes, 366. 

Ellice, Fort, on the Assiniboine, its 
situation, 50; Mr. M‘Kay, its 
superintendent, 50 ; author's arri- 
val, 50, 51; stay—men from 
engaged in hunting — buffalo 
tongues, robes, live calves,ete.,sent 
in—visit from two Indians~ 
Nunmé engaged—departure, 51- 
53; dows sent for from, 328, 

Elmira, 3. 

Embarras, or Lying-wood River, a 
tributary of the River M‘Leod; 
179; view of Rocky Mountain 
range from its banks, 180; 
Troquois hunters in its neighbour- 
hood, 180-185; author's party 
ascend its course, and cross more 
than fifty times, 185-187. 

English Creek, 138, 295. 

English settlers, 32; few in number, 

361, 362. 

Episcopalian—Bishop (of Rupert’s 
Land), at Fort Garry, 33, 352, ete. ; 
clergy, 352; cathedral, 33, 357, 
361 ; St. James’s church on the 
Assiniboine, 34,362 ; missionary 
(Rev, Mr. Settee) at Fort Pelly, 
323, 

Erie railway, 2, 3. 

__Etna, the, passage home in, 372. 

Eyes—of some animals, when at 
bay, 121; of horses, shining like 
stars, 190, 


INDEX. 


F a 

Fall Indians. See Indians, 

Fire,—on a prairie, 19; near Lake 
Forty-four, 20; country deva- 
stated by, 137, 139, 250, 267, 
285; art in building a, 305. 
See Camp-fire. 

Firs, * Sce Trees, . 

Fish in the Saskatchewan, 83, 84. 

Flathead Indians. Sce Indians, 

Flowers, profusion of, 70; at Lake 
St. Ann Mission, 168, ’ 

Flying-squirrel, The, 234, 

Forteseue, Mr,, senior clerk at Fort- 
Garry, 30; renders valuable 
assistance to author, 31, 366; 

“now (1874) officer-in-charge at 
York Factory, 366. 

Fossils, Rocky Mountain, 193, 221. 

Fox, a Cree chief, 60 ; 9 sleigh-log, 
337, ; 

Fox, barking of the, 135 ; chase of 
in snow, 307 ; fur of, when prime, 
307. . 

Franklin, Sir John, 16,17, 27,317, 

Fraser's River, 262, 269. 

Free-traders. See Half-breeds. 

French settlers, 32,361, See Hallf- 
breeds, Fort Garry. 

Frog River, 284, : 

Frogs, 23, 26. 

Fuel, dry buffalo-dung as, 67 ; 
different sorts of contrasted, 306. 


G 


- Gaprizzs (Bull-dogs), 46, 71, 72,90. 


Garry, Fort, capital of Red River 
settlement, 2; arrival at, 29; 
description: of, 30 ; residents in 
Fort, 30; SissyGeorge Simpson 
leaves, 31; population of its 

_ Vicinity, 32 ; Protestant and Ro- 
man Catholic bishops at, 32, 352. 


INDEX. 


(See Anderson :~ Taché)—~ Nun- 
nery at, visited, 32, 33 ; churches 
at, 33, 357, 361; arrival of the 
“ Ans Northup” at, 34; prepara- 
tions for leaving, 35-39 ; departure 
of author's expedition ‘from, 40 ;. 
retuith “of expedition to, 350 ; 
“The Nor’ Wester” published at, 
351, 352, 364 ; meeting on re- 
vivals held there, 352-855 ; 
leave-takings at,"364; final de- 
parture from, 366. For statistics, 
etc, see Red River Settlement, 

Geese, wild, 137, 142. 

Germans in Chicago, 6, 

Goats, Wild, description of, 243 ; 
one stalked, and missed, 192; 
seen on cliffs in North River 
Valley—descent in the dark, 227, 
228 ; searched for in vain, 238 ; 
hunted—difficult climb—lake in 
crater—two shot, 241-243 ; eight 
seen, Bow River Valley, 249, 

Grant, Rev, G., quoted, 361. 

Gratitude and ingratitude, 220, 319. 

Great Creek, 57. 

Grosventres, See Indians. 

Ground-squirrels, 70,.191. 

Grouse (varieties designated Prairie- 
fowl— See Prairie-fowl); the 
Spotted or Wood-Grouse called 
* Partridge,” 172, 185, 186, 238, 
249; the Dusky Grouse, called 
“ Partridge”? 196; the Ruffed 
Grouse, 17, 18, 249; the Ptar- 
migan, 229; the Sharp-tailed 
Grouse, 16, 17; the Pinnated’ 
Grouse, 16, 17. 

Guns: guns and saddle left, 8 ; 
brought on, 37 ; guns and rifles 
of author, 37, 38, 80, 124°; of 
author's party, 38, 55, 58, 183, 
199; common “ trade ” article, 
55; flintlocks of the half-breeds, 
125; leather gun-covers, 1813) 


iy 
‘ 


431 


bullets of author’s rifles, 38 ; wni- 
versal gauge in Company’ Fy ‘teri- 
tories, 38. 


H 


Half-breeds (Hunters, Free-men, 

Free-traders),fewin United States, 
163; number in Red River 
Settlement in 1872, 361 ; distri- 
ution of their races in settle- 
ment, 32, 359, 361; characteris- 
tics, 359-361; dress and appear- 
ance of the men, 9, 45, 171, 182, 
202-204, 233, 292, 348, 359- 
361; dress and appearance of the 
women, 44, 176, 348; moccasins, 
9, 38, 232, 233; fire-bags, 39, 
350; free-men, frée-traders, 66, 
139, 326, 327; magic, 81-83, 
104; horsemanship, 45 ;.compul-- 
sion of horses, 136, 302-305 ; 
dog driving, 337-340 ; carts, 13, 
44; horse-sleds, 293; carioles, 
334 ; snow-shoes, 316-318, 335; 
Joading and shooting, 125 ; gun- 
covers, 181; hide-lines, 120 ; - 
hunter's knife, 164, 214; modes 
of hunting bears, 24, 119, 206 ; 
destruction of trees, -44, 251 ; 
great annual buffalo hunts, 30, 
40, 361; gathering at White 
Horse Plains, 40 ; picturesque- 
ness on march, 44; buaters from 
Carlton, and camp at Cherry Bush, 
99-127; hunters in Jasper's House 
District, 176, 180. 

Hamilton; 6 

Hardisty, Mr., officer in charge 
at Carlton, 127; hospitably re- 
ceives author, 127, 298; rides 
with him to horse-guard, 129; 
assists him in various arrange- 
ments, 131; presents him with 
moccasins and hunting-shirt, 132 ; 


439 \ 


helps him in arrangements about 
horses, 298, 2995 author's fare- 
well to, 300 ; now, (1874) chief 


- officer of Saskatchewan district, 


300. 


Hare, the American, 265, 333. 


Heurne, on the skunk, 136, 137. 
Hector, a red Water- aniel, his 


demerits, 46; cowatdice, 56; | 


trial and execution, 65., 

Hector, Dr, 153, 245, 246, 261. 

Heat, extreme, near the Qu’appelle, 
57, 69; in Qu'appelle, Valley, 
71; on’ Sandy Hills, near. the 
Elbow, 72; on plains near the 
Roasting Hills, 92 ; in & roomin 
winter, 346. \ 

Height-of- Jand,—between Medicine 
Tent River andN orth River (Atha- 
basca and North Saskatchewan 
“head-waters), 200, 201; (@ cairn 
raised there, 196, 301) between 
North River and watershed \of 
main stream of North Saskat- 
chewan, 230 ;—between North 
Saskatchewan and Pew River) 


chief head-water of South Saskat- 


chewan, 287. 


Hind (H. Y.) Mr., author of Cana- 


dian Exploring Eupedition, cited 
on Yetrao cupide, 17 ; on Antélo- 
cupra Americana, 57; on origin 
of name Qwappelle, 67 ; on source 
of Aiktow River, 74; on feasibi- 
lity’ of junction of South Saskat- 
chewan with Red River: on 
width of South Saskatchewan : 
on angle of Elbow, 76, 77 ; on 


Amelauchier Cunadensis, 86 3 on | 


dog-carioles, 334; map in his 
work cited on true lines for com- 
munication between Canada and 
Pacific, 333, oe 


Hind, Mx, an Americah. gentleman, 
met by ‘author, 144, 263, 


“ ~ 


INDEX. 


Hole-in-the-day, an Ojibway chief, 
369. 

Hood’s Ode to Rae Wilson, 303. 

Hopkins, Mr., secretary to Sir G.' 
Simpson: sets out with him and 
author for Far West, 5; visits . 
with them Minnehaha Falls, 105 
shares Sir George’s tent, 15, 22: 
rides a skewbald pony from Pem- 
bina, 28; at Fort Garry, 30; 


leaves. with Sir George,— ex- 
changes farewells with the author, 
31; writes to inform author of 
Sir George’s death, in 1860, 31: 
Horse Hill, 138, 295, " 
Horses, — PoRcHASES AND Es- 
- CHANGES oF-—at St. Paul, 9, 
10-— at Fort Garry, 36, 37-— 
at White Horse Plains, 41, 
43 —at Carlton, 130 — at Pitt, 
140, 14l—at Edmonton, 157, 
158, 164—at St. Aun, 169-— 
with Iroquois near. Embarras 
River, 183-185—with  Stonies 
near Bow River, 247, 248, 260-— 
at Edmonton, 269—~at Carlton, 
298, 299-~all the horses left - 
at Pelly, 333. . .. Brexpixe 
EstsguisHMENnr oF, at Carlton, 
130—at Pitt, 140 ; woolly breed, 
28; wild breed, 136; fatness 
counted a merit, 41; suffering 
from insects, 57, 72,143; smoke- 
fires, 57,143 ; seldom eat flowers, 
73; supposed injury from magic, 
1; breaking in of Lane, 135; 
hobbles, 145 ; shoeing on plain or 
mountain, 217 ; in boggy places, | 
170,173, 186, 308 ; among fallen 
trees, 187; one staked, 226 ; 
sudden death, 226 ; fall down an 
jeebank, 229 ; gentleness with 
children, 248; noosing of in an 
enclosure, 299; # conciliation ” of 
“the dbstinate, 308 ; drivers’ lan- 


INDEX, - 433 


guage, 304; gregarious habits, 
13, 91, 130, 304; fate when 
strayed, 172; mares seldom rid- 
den-—~ stallions less numerous 
than geldings, 176 ; unfitness for 
winter travelling, 314,317 + lost 


of position towards the Indians 
in its northern and southern dis- 
tricts,“327 ; good laws in Red 


River Settlement, 352, 357, 362, .- 
Hunters, half-breed. See half-breed. 


e 


\ 


during mountain journey six (see|—- * - t 


--summary;-270),—=during winter 
journey two, 312, 317 ; painted 
by Indians, 58, ,299—branded 
with emblems, .'57 — scented, 
299; Blackfeet, Crees, Stonies, 
Crows,” Flatheads; treatmént af 
-and quality of horses, 288, 289 ; 
price ‘of horses in 1859-60, see 
under purchases and exchanges 
(above); sometimes exchanged 
for rum, 228. . . , CBYEPLY 
REFERRED TO: See Bichon, Black, 
Blond, Cendré, Jasper, Morgan, 
Montonne, Rowland, Vermont, 
_ Wawpooss. 
Horse-shoeing, 128, 142, 157, 217. 
Horse-sleds, 293. a 
Hudson’s Bay Company, its assist- 
ance promised to author, 1, 
rendered, 1-371; Governor-in- 


Chief of its territories at date of |. 


Journey, Sir George Simpson, 1, 
31,364: Gin 1860-62, Mi. Dallas, 
364: 1862-70, Mr, Mactavish, 
364.) Gentlemen in its service 


chiefly referréd to, sce Sir. George |- 


Simpson, Messrs. Brazeau, Ca- 
méron, Cardinal, Chastellain, 
’ Christie, Fortescue, Hardisty, 
Lane, Macaulay, M‘Kay, Mac- 
kenzie, Mactavish, “Murray, Sin- 
clair, Taylor ; posts’ chiefly re- 
ferred to, see Carlton, Edmon- 
ton, Ellice, Garry, Jasper's House, 
Lachine, Pembina, Pelly, Pitt, 


Qu appelle, Touchwood Hills ; its 
judicious management of the In- 
dians, 326, 327, 357 ; difference 


Inpians.——(Assiniboines, Blackfeet, 


Blood, Chipeweyans, Crees, 
Crows, Fall,“Indians, Flat- 
heads, Iroquois, ‘Kootanies; Man- 
dans, Piegéns, Saulteaux, Sioux, 
Sircees,)—AsstviBotnes.— Mean- 
ing of word, 244; of Sionx or 
Dacotah origin, 244 ; Plain tribe 
—ceamp and site, supposed of, 
77; never go west of Bad Hill, 


113; rough. masters to their , 


horses, 299; Mountain tribe— 
vld camps near M‘Lieod River; 187; 
small camp of, 245 3-transactions 
with, 245, 249 ; their wives, 248, 
249 ; consumptive patient, 249 ; 
letter in Cree characters, 250 ; 
larger camp of, transactions with— 
their Christianity and good conduct 


. —head-man presents a. pipe —., 


preacher—loyalty—-present pro- 
mised to thern—horses, fire-bag, 
knife-sheath bought, 255, 260 ; 
beauty of men’s hands, 262 ; 
young man’s pretty ‘wife, 262 ; 
on bad terms with the Blackfeet, 
262 ; letter and present to, from 


author, 270, 271; subsequent. 


extinction by smallpox, 271 . . 
. . Brackrret.—About ta go to 
war with Crees, 42 ; Nahtooss, a 
‘ chief of, 438, 272; war parties 
anticipated, 52 ; direction of their 


‘country, 77, 78, 114; author’s - 


party mistaken for, 99,100 ; the 
Bad Hill in their war-path, 110 ; 
war parties, risks from, 118, 125 ; 


- QF 


434 


Horse Hill, battle at, with Crees, 
138 ;-regard for the English—a 
inan stripped of his goods, 151 ; 
achief on polygamy and rum, 
155 ; their musical turn, 158 ; 
hieroglyphies on a horse, 158 5 
a great warrior~-Pe-toh-pee-kiss, 
160-162 ; three principal tribes 
of, 162 ; amiability when druvk, 
163 ; faithfulness of their w onien, 
163; on bad terms with the 
Stonies, 262 ; their track to Ed- 
monton, 267 ; amusing intrusiun 
of two envoys, 271, 272; ap- 
proach of tribe to Edmonton, 
272 ;" hostility to Europeans, 
275, 311; incident of war with 
. Crees, 286, 287 ; their Confedera- 
tion, constant warfare, horse-steal- 
‘“ing, neatness of dress, stately Jan- 
guage, 287, 288 ; care for their 
horses, 299 ; fight with the Crees 
near the Elbow, 310, 311. 
Broop Inprans,-—A Blackfoot 
tribe, 162, 287 ;,many of them 
. faircomplexioned, 162; awoman’s 
dress sold for rum, 288 .. .-} 
Cuirewryars—A northern tribe 
distinct from the Chippeways or | 
Ojibways, 287; character of! 
language, 287... . Crees, — 
Small camp near Fort Garry, 34, 
35 ; about to go to war with | 
Blackfeet, 42 ; a chief’s gon travel- 
ling with his wife, 52; dress 
of handsome pattern, 59; Les 
Prairies, son of Fox, a chief, 
60, 633 ornamental ‘whip, 62; 
name for river Qwappelle, 67; 
camp-sites, supposed to be of, 69, 
77 ; notions about hell and para- 
dise, 71 ; friendly to Europeans, 


8; their magic, 81-83 ; name 
for Amelanchier  ovalis, 86; 


hunters from Carlton surprise | 


. 


INDEX. 


‘Hill, 


. their women immoral, 


author's camp, 99; Bad Hill 
dangerous for, 110; emissaries 
report Blackfoot war-parties, 125 ; 
(Wood Crees) near Jack-fish lake, 
145 ; at Pitt, 137, 139; Horse 
battle at with Blackfect, 


138; syllabic characters, 149 ; 


‘Lapatdque —a principal chief, 


159 ; quarrelsome when in liquor, 
163; women, many -married to 
white men, 163; incident of war- 
fare with Blackfeet, 286, 287; 
character of language, 287 ; steal 
horses from Blackfeet, 288 ; 
rough masters to their horses, 
299; fight with Blackfeet near 
the Elbow 310-311; names for 
animals— See Descriptions of ani- 
mals . . Crows. — Women 
immoral, -163; bravery of the 
warriors, 288 .... Fann In- 
piaxs (or Grosvestres), — Of 
Blackfoot race, 162, 287; con- 
federated with the Blackfeet, 287 
. FuaruEabs, — Christian 
and honest, 154; character of 
language, 287... . IRoquoys.— 
Baptist and Toma, 5; Mountain 
Iroquois family, 173— the wile 
and child, 176, 177—the child 
cured of illness, 182, 163—parted 
from, 185 ; camp of hunters, 180+ 
— dress, 182—horees bought and 
exchanged, 183-185 ;- bunter 
leaves for Jasper’s House, 187 . 
. . Kooranms,—Christian and 
honest, 154.;. character of Jan- 
guage, 287 .. . . MANDANS— 
Catlin on their bull-boats, 87 ; 
Catlin on their self-tortures, 151 ; 
163... 
., Osmwars.—- Drunkard met, 
17; The Pillageurs met, and 


. described, 18, 19; Saulteaux, a 


branch of the tribe-— party of 


INDEX. 435 


them met at Pembina—meaning 
of the name, 27, 28; spectators 
of arrival of steamer, 34: one of 
them visits author, 51; party of 
at Quappelle: Fort, 59; their 
head-men Spots-in-the-sky and 
Poihted-cap visit author's camp | 
and are visited at their own, 60- 
63 ; sometimes called Chippeways, 
but distinct from the Chzpeweyang, | 
287; their language, 287°; Saul- 
teaux: peaceable at Fort Pelly, 
322; Saulteaux burn a madman 
—and martyr a priest, 342 ; Hole- 
in-the-day, their chief, his drunk- 
enness and his wealth, 369 ; 
bravery of his predecessor, Hole- 
in-the-sky (day), 370... ... 


‘Pregans.— A Blackfoot tribe, + 


162, 287... .. Stoux.—War- 
path, 45 ;- comparative ‘chastity 
of women, 163 ; adherence to old 
mode of dress, 164 ; Assiniboines 
an offshoot from, 244; anecdote, . 
fight with two trappers, 330 ; 
rule as to Europeans, 331 .. 4. 
Sincres.—Of Chipeweyan-“iuce, 
confederated with the Blackfeet, 
287 ; character of language, 287. 
.. . . INDIANS, UNCLASSIFIED— 
Loyalty to the Queen, 34, see 
first steamer on Red River, 34; 
appearance of women, 34, 44, 
132, 262; two attacked’ by 
bear, 110 ; women, industry of, 
124, 132, 155, 308; hard to 
convert, 154, 324 ; in regard to 
polygamy, 155, 308; music, 
158; rewarded for wearing 
British medals, 160 ; conduct of 


women, 163; horsemanship of |. 


boys, 158; temperance society 
at St. Ann, 167 ; tendency of their 
supernaturalism, 168; notions 
about the aurora, 183; (signs 


a 


oo, 
ge pee 


of a change of route, 224; 
robe of marmot skins, 231 ; art 
instincts, 233 ; improvident 
slaughter of game, 263, 264 ; 
habit of burning the plains, 285 ; 
characteristics of their languages, 
287; two huntera treed by a 
bear, 290 ; old woman in peril, 
294; as regards strong drink, 
327, 357, 370; relations with 
the Hudson's Bay Company, 326, 
327, 357 ; a woman's grave at 
Fort Pelly, 328 ; distaste for 
missionaries’ paradise, 328; a@ 
mourner in solitude,;”"328 ; con- 
stitution and health, physicians 
and surgeons, 329; partake of 
the communion, 333 ; no _oaths 
in their languages, 338 ; number 
in Manitoba in 1872, 361. 

Insects, See Mosquitoes, etc. 

Troquois. See Indians, 

Isbister, Mr., 285, 293. 


J 


Jack-fish Lake, 137; im winter, 
296. | 

Jardine, Siz William, 16. 

Jasper, a favourite black pony- 
stallion, bought near the Rocky 
Motntains, 184; investigates 
shooting boots, 185; his merit 
in. swalups, 186; picturesque ap- 
pearance; 205 ; steadiness, 214 ; 
strength in. fording Bow River, 

256; sent’on to Fort Pitt, 271 ; 
hauls a sled, 305 ; exhausted by 
winter journey, dies, 313. 

Jasper’s House, a post in the Rocky 
Mountains—145, 148,167, 187, 

-~ 215, 264. 


K 
Kane, Mr. Paul, 5, 27, 215. 


436 _ INDEX. 


Kennedy, Mr., Fort Garry, 30. ~ 

King, Major Ross, 17 

Kingston, 4. ‘ 

Kitson, a fur-trader, 7, 8 

Kline (George), a French half- breed 
—-joins author's expedition from, 
Fort Garry, 35; characteristics 
of, 47; observes a wolf, 67; 
kills a badger, 103 ; with author 
to the Bad Hill, 109-117; chases 
a wounded bull, 119 ; strength 
and activity, 194; catches old 
Lane, 136; his cart sticks in a 
creek, 136 ; appearance of, 203 ; 
extemporises a tent, 244 ; ‘mends 

” boot, ete., 257 stakes horsesto Pitt, 
271; winter garb, 292; makes 
the track, 302; becomes guide 
in M‘Kay’s absence, 334 ; makes 
snow - shoes, 335; humane to 
sleigh - dogs — conveys message 
against crnelty, 340 ; makes an 
eighteen hours’ journey, 347, 348; 
becomes guide from Fort Garry 
to Crow-wing, 364; makes a 
fifty-eight miles’ journey, 366 ; 
farewell, 368, 


Mo 


L 


Lac des Isles, 169, 170. 

Lac de YOurs qui nage, 298. 

' Lachine, 4, 5. 

Lacome, Pere, of St. Ann, 167, 169. 

La Crosse, 370.' 

Lagrace, a French half-breed hunter, 
134 ; joins’ the party as a guide, 
138; his eccentricity—method 
with horse among fallen trees, 
187; kills a “ partridge,” 195, 
196 ; catches a porcupine with 
Pointer, 197; his strange ap- 
pearance and ways, 203, 204 ; 
his horse drops down dead, 226 ; 
searches; for the track, 298 ; 

wT 


attached to M‘Kay’s mess, 247 ; 
takes horses to Fort Pitt, 271 ; 
strengthened by long rest, 293. 

Lane, a white horse, of the wild 
breed, 36, 136, 203, 247 ; his 
breaking-in, 135. 


. Lane, Mr.,,White Horse Plains Fort, 


\ 40. ay 

Lapatique, a Cree chief, 159. 
Larches, Sce Trees. 

Leaf Dake, and City, 17, 368. 

Le Frain, Pare, St. Ann,-167, 268. 

Les Prairies, a Cree, 60, 62. 

Lindsay, Sir Coutts, Bart., mountain 

named after, by author, 193. 

Lines, making of buffalo-hide, 120. 

Little Devil’s Lake, 113, 136. 

Livingstone, Dr., on polygamy, 156. 

Lobsticks, 44, 251 . 

Longfellow, Mr. H. W., 10. 

Long Lake Creek, 69. 

Long Point, 66. 

Loon, diving of the, 49. 


Lytton, Lord, remarks on his My 


Novel,'276-278 ; on his Haunters 
and Haunted, 323. 
\ ~ 
M , 


Macaulay, Mr., 139, 268. 
M‘Beath, Morrison, a Red River 
Scotsman—Joins author's expe- 


dition, 35 ; characteristics of, 47 5» 


chases wolf, 85, 86; ;chases wolves, 
101; shoots "two -cows, 119; 
thrown. from a cart, 185°; assists 
in raising a cairn, 190 ; appear- 
ance of, 208; in the “ Golden Era,” 
274 ; his fur-cap, 292 ; accident 
happens to, 334, 335 ; his uncle, 
335 ; farewell, 364. 

Macdonald, Mz., Fort Pelly, 323. 

M‘Intosh, Mr, 27. . 

M‘Kay, Mr, Fort Ellice, 50- 53. 

Mackay, James, a Red "River guide 


ony 


INDEX. 


—leads a party from Red River, 
8; meets Sir G, Simpson and 
author at St. Anthony, 8 ; his ap- 
pearance and characteristics, 8, 9 ; 
awaifs Sir George g wowing, 
guide ahd voya- 
geur, 3, 27 ; chooses camp, 
at Crow-wing River, 15 ; shoots 

ducks, etce., with Dr. Rae, 16; 
shakes off an insolent Ojibway, 
18; extemporises a hut, 22; 
makes an oilskin scow, 23; 

‘Tuns and shoots a bear, 24; 
arranges crossing of Red Lake 
River, 25; carries Sir -George 
across Vieux Marais, 285; sells 

- horses to author, 37; meets 

author and drives him to Fort 

Garry, 349, 350." 

" Mackay, John, a Red River guide, 
brother’ of James, Mackay— [ 
engaged as head man of suthor’s 
party, 35; brings author's gun- 
cages, etc., from St. Paul, 37 ; his, 
serviceable gun, 38; his charac- 
teristics, 47; tries Bichon, 50; 
rides with author to Quiappelle 
Fort, 51; makes sxle-trees, 54; 
shoots at target, 55 ; interprets at 
Ojibway Camp, 61 ; shoots: Hee- 
tor, 65; shoots a wolf in camp, 
68 ; ‘runs wolf with author, 71 ; 
consulted as to route, 78 ; runs’ 
buffalo with author, 80; tells 
tales of Indian magic, 81, 82, 

. wounds, a fine cabree, 84 ; his 
gun misses fire at a bull, 84; 
rons a bull with Duncan, 85; 
runs buffalo with author, 91, 92 ; 

~ stones a sleeping wolf, 102 ; tries 

Morgan as a runner, 119 ; fin- 

ishes a bull, 119; wounds a 

wolf, 123; bis strength of arm, 

124; rides with author to 
Carlton horse - guard, 129— |} 


, kat, 188 ; 


437 


and to Pitt horse-guard, 139 ; 
alters horse-shoes, 142 ; ; shoots a 
female wolf, 142 ; tracks a strayed 
horse, 172 ; makes too hurried a 
stalks sheep and 
goat, 191, 192; helps to raise a 
cairn,..196 ; his appearance and 
dress, 202; shoots several fine 
rams, 212-215; discussions and 
explanations with, 224, 225 ; 
left behind for the night, 214 ; 
interprets, etc, at camp of 
Assiniboines, 247 ; makes carts 
and harness, 257 ; runs bear with 
author, 265 ; inspects horses 
963; forms one of crew of 
“Golden Era,” 274; has a 
slight illness, 976; reports on 
ice-dam in river, 251; makes a 
draught-board, 281 ; rides for- 
ward to Pitt ‘with author, 285 ; 
hig winter attire, pe: 3. Tuns 
foxesin the snow, 306,307 jeven- 
‘ing in authors tent, 315 p goes 
in “advance to Fort Pelly, 321; 
remains at Fort Pelly, 334; re- 
joins author at Fort Garry, 362 ; 
farewell, 364. 


Mackenzie, Mr. of Pembina, death 


and funeral of, 355, 356. 


Mackenzie, Mr. and Mrs., Lachine, 4. 
Mackenzie, Mr., Manitobah, 345, 
Mackenzie River, short days at, 335. 


M‘Leod River, a tributary of the 
Athabasca, ita width and charac- 
ter, 1-75; author's party in its 
neighbourhood, 175-190. 


Mactavish, Mr, officer in charge at 


Fort Garry; 30%. appointed Go- 
vernor of Assiniboia in 1860, 
and Goyernor-in:Chief of the 
Hudson’s Bay Company’s terri- 
tories in 1862, 364; renders 
great help to author, 31; writes 
to author in 1860, 298 ; 3 ex- 


438 INDEX 


changes farewells with him, 364 ; 


sorrowful notice of bis death in | 


1870, 364, 365. 
Madison, 6. 
Magic, Indian, 81, 82. : 
Mandans, the. See Indians. 
Manitoba, province of, population 


cent scenery of the valley, 194; 
name indicates magic and niystery 
201; district not previously 
visited by any. European, 201 ; 
mountains of, similar in compo- 
sition to the rock-formations near. 
Edinburgh, 201. 


in 1872, 361. 


Manitobah Fort, 345. 

Manitobah Lake, origin, meaning, 
-and accentuation of name, 345 ; 
. quality, of its ice, 342 ; its shores, 


342; its size, 345 ; party cross 
a wide bay of, 344; arrive at 
Manitobah Fort, 345 ; travel on 
ice to Mr. Monkman’s house, 346 ; 
eross Oak Point and leave lake at 
south-east corner, 347. 


Marmots of the Rocky Mountains, |: 


230, (also see Sifflenr); Parry's 


described, 231; small variety’ 


described, 230, 


Matheson, Donald, a Red River 


Scotsman, joins author's expedi- 
tion, 35 ; characteristics of, 47 ; 
with author in search of deer, 
48 ; relates stories about Indian 
magic, 81-83 ; ferries author 
across Saskatchewan, 89 ; unwell, 
170 ; his horse disturbs a wasp’s 
nest, 1743; amused by Toma’s 
wit, 200; appearance of, 202, 
203 ; ‘unwell, 236, 237; left 
behind for a night, 244 ; for- 
merly” with Captain Blakiston, 
257 ; shoes horses for American 
travellers, 263 ; in the “ Golden 
Era,” 274; hardy winter journey, 
274, 282 ; expostulations with 
horse, 304 ; helps Cendré for- 
ward, 319 ; farewell, 364. 


Medicine. See Magic, 

Medicine-men, Indian, 329, 

Medicine Tent River, an Athabasca |‘ 
head-water, 193, 221; magnifiz” 


Meesasskootoom-meena berry (Ame- 
lanchier ovalis), 86, 87, 301, 

Meteor, a, 224, 

Michigan, Lake, 6 

Milwaukie, 6 

Minnehaha Falls, 10, 11, 

Miry Creek, 14. 

Missiofis,—-adult Indians slow to ac- 
cept Christianity, 154, 324 ; mis- 

. sionaries too strict as regards 
polygamy, 155; their views as 
to Heaven distasteful, 328, Pro- 
TESTANT— Missionaries sometimes 
of the wrong class, 167 ; success 
of Rev, Mr. Woolsey and other 
_Wesleyan missionaries among 
” Assiniboines, 150, 245, 258; ~ 
"355; Wesleyan Mission fund, 
large subscription to, 150; 
Rev. Mr. Settee’s converts, 333. 
Roman Carnonic — Success of 
Father de Smet among Kootanies 
and Flatheads, 154 ; mission at 
St. Ann prosperous and useful, 
167-169 ; priest martyred by 
Saulteaux, 342 ; mission at Oak 
Point, 347. 

Mississippi, the, 6, 7, 11, 14, 370. 

Moberly, Mr. 166. 

Moccasins, 9, 33, 131 ;, described, 
232, 233. 

Monkman, Mr, hospitably enter- 
tains author’s party, 346.- 

Moutonne, a very old white mare, 

. 184, 186, 214, 255, 270. 

Moon—moonrise in the Rocky 
Mountains, 214, 224--opposite 
sunset, 268—over mountains of 


INDEX. 439 


Jack-fish Lake, 296 ; rainbow 
round, 224; 267, 318 ; eclipse of, 
368. . . 

Moose Creek, 284. 

Moose, meat of, 181, 251 ;\eracks 
of seen, 186, 237 ; three shot by 
the Stonies, 245, 246, . 

Morgan, a favourite bay pony, bred 
in Vermont,—his beauty and 
merits, 10, 13, 19, 37; strays, 
45 ; astonished by a dog-train, 
63 ; breaks away, 90 ; tried as a 
buffalo-runner, 119; brings a 
swift cow to bay, 120, 122; 
thin and worn, 127; left at 
Carlton, 129; attacked by the 
horse epidemic: finally left at 
Carlton, 298. 

Mosquitoes, 19, 25, 46, 48, 57, 68, 
69, 115, 133, 134, 138, 143, 
166, 195 ; classified, 67. ° 

“ Mountain where the water falls,” 
249, . 

Munroe, Piskan,a Scotch half-breed : 

to be engaged as interpreter, being 

connected with the Blackfeet, 16-4 ; 
shoots ducks, 171 ; shoots a sif- 
flenr, 192; shoots a fine ram, 

199, 200 ; his appearance, 203 ; 

meets author with horses, 220 ; 

question regarding his function 
as a guide, 225 ; taken ill, 237 ; 

farewell, 269. 

Murchison, Mount, height of, 252. 

Murray, James, 5. 

Murray, Mr., officer in charge at 
Fort Pelly (for many years resi- 

” dent in the Missouri country,330), 
sends his dog-cariole to meet 
author, 321 ; hospitably receives 
him, 322.; and giveshim infor- 
mation relative to the Indians, 

_ ete,, 326, 331 ; shoots a wolverine, 
324 ; recéives author's horses for 
the Company, 333 ; accepts from 


him Ned, a favourite pony, 332. 


Music, Indian, 158, 245. 
Musk-rats, 264. 
Muskegs (bogs), 173. 


N 


Nahtooss, a Blackfoot, 43, 272. 
Napésskes, a Cree half-breed, runs 


buffalo with author, 104, 105; 
guides the expedition to Bad Hill, 
108-118; risks his scalp in so 
doing, 110; his peculiar dress, 
108; hunts grisly bears with 
author, 111-113; stalks buffalo 
on foot, 114, 115; rides a vio- 
lent young horse, 130, 


New York, 2, 370, 371. 
Niagara, Falls of, 3, 4. 
North River, a North Saskatche- 


wan headwater, its valley and 
branches, 193, 201, 221, 223, 
230; the brigade’s picturesque 
appearance passing into its valley, 
202-205; Mount Dalhousie, 222 ; 
beautiful scenery, 223; counter- 
marches, sudden death of a horse, 
224-997; difficult climb over 
height-of land’ to watershed of 
North Saskatchewan, 228-230. 


Norway House, 31, 
Nor’-Wester, The, the first newspaper 


started at Fort Garry, 351, 362. 


Nummé, Pierre, a Frencle half-breed, 


engaged as a guide, 52; his ap- 


. pearance, 53, 54; his gun-doctor- 


c 


ing, 55; cabree-stalking with 
author, his cutting-up feat, 56; 
cabree-stalking with author, 66 ; 
disputes his contract, 78 ; little 
knowledge of road, 90; buffalo-. 
running, 91; ambushes a young 
bull, 955, with author to Bad. 
Hill, 108; bear- hunting, 111- 


113; buffalo-stalking, 115 ; with 


¢ 


410 


author, finds and skins bear, 114- 
117; paid off at Carlton, takes 
care of number-one, 130. 

Nunnery at Fort Garry, visit to, 
32, 33 ; its situation, 361. 


0) 


Oak Point, on Lake Manitobah, 437. 

Oaks. See Trees, 

Ojibways. See Indians, 

Ontario, Lake, 4. 

Otter-tail Lake, 18, 367, 368; 
sourcé of the Red River, 368. 

P 

Palliser, Captain, 9, 131, 215, 269, 
275. ‘ 

Partridge. See Grouse, 

Pedlar, an American, 25. 

Pelicans, 20. 

Pelly, Fort, Mr. Murray officer 
in charge, 321; agriculture 
and cattle, 323 ; author's arrival, 
stay, conversations with Mr. 

+ Murray and Rev. Mr. Settee, 
engagement of dog-trains, de- 
parture, 321-334, 

Pembina, 27, 366. 

Pembina River, 170. 

Pemmican, described, 301, 302; 
stores run short, 100; more ob- 
tained at Carlton, 133; excellent 
obtained at St. Ann, 169; made 
of mountain sheep, 176 ; stores 
run short, 245, 268 ; mixed with 
Saskootoom berries, 301; chief 

‘food of party, 315 ; ninety-pound 
bag drops on M‘Beath’s foot, 
334, 


Pe-toh-pee-kiss, a Blackfoot, 160 ef . 


$€Q. 
Pheasants, See Prairie-fowl. 
* Piegans. See Indians, 


Yr 


INDEX, 


Pigeons, passenger, 26, 58, 171. 

Pike Creek, 267, 

Pillage Creek, whence the name, 19. 

Pine River, 26. 

Pines. * See Trees. 

Pitt, Fort, on the North Saskatche- 
wan, described, 139; Messrs, 
Macaulay and Sinclair in charge, 
139; Mr. Chastellain in charge, 
285 ; Mr. Simpson once in charge, 
42; its agriculture, 286; men 
employed there, 285 ; scarcity of 

* provisions, 100, 133, 255, 285; 
author's arrival, stay, visit to the 
horse-guard, departure, 139- 
141; horses brought from there, 
282; author's return, stay, con- 
versations with Mr. Chastellain, 
winter clothing and horse-sleds 
obtained, departure, 285-293, 

Pointed-cap, an Ojibway, 61, 62. 

Pointer, a black pointer, 53; 
turns from a wolf at bay, 56; 

‘worries a dying comrade, 65 ; ’- 
persecuted by mosquitoes, 68 ; 
chased by a wolf in camp, 68 ; 
in fits from the heat, and run 
over by cart, 72; attacks a 
wounded wolf, 86 ; unluckily in- 
vades author’s tent, 133 ; jealous 
of Whisky, 135 ; active in catch- 
ing ducks, 142; unfortunate in 
catching a porcupine, 197; 
suffers from the cold, 269. 

Polygamy among the Indians, 155, 
156, 308. 

Porcupine (Hystrix ptlosus), 195, 
197, 200. ‘ 

Prairie du Chien, 6. 

Prairie-fowl, varieties so designated 
(Tetrao cupido, Telrao phasian- 
ellus, Tetrao wmbellus), their claims 
considered, 16, 17; shot by 
the party in Red river district, 
16, 23 (239); in Saskatche- 


INDEX. ' 


wan district, 145, 268 (239); 
Rocky Mountains, 264. See 
Grouse. 

Presbyterian, Scottish settlers mostly 
so, 357 ; church near Fort Garry, 
335; minister, 353, 357; in- 
fluences, 33, 42, 144. 

Protestant. . See Episcopalian, Pres- 
byterian, Missions, Red River 
Settlement, ete. 

Ptarmigan, The (Tetrao [Lagopus] 
Afutus), 228, 229, See Grouse. 

Puma, The, 207, 208. 

Purdey, Mr., excellent pair of rifles 
belonging to author, made by, 
37,49, 60, 80, etc. ; pair of shot- 
“guns by, 38, 91, 125, ete. . 


Q 


Quwappelle Fort, its superintendent, 


Mr, Cardinal, meets author, 59 ; 
author's arrival—stay—visits to |- 


and from Ojibways, 59-64; de- 
parture, 65 ; to be conjoined with 
Touchwood Hills Fort, 313. 

Qu appelle River, valley of the, 66 ; 


origin of the name, 67 ; source’ 


of, 76. 
Queén Victoria, portrait of—loyalty 
of Indians, 34, 260. 


R 


Rabbits. See Hare. 
Rae, Dr., meets Sir George Simpson 
and author at Toronto, 5; his 
Arctic expedition~—reference to it 
in Mr. Ballantyne’s Hudson's Bay, 
5; joins Sir George’s party, .9 ; 
sets out from Crow-wing, 13 ; 
shares tent with author, 15, 21; 
shoots praitie-fowl, etc, 16; at 
‘Fort Garry, 30; renders great 
help to author, 31 ; visits nunnery 
with author, 32, 33. 


441 


Raven’s nest, 69, 139. 

Red Deer Hill, 138, 293 ; River, 
264, 265. 

Red Lake River, 24, 25. 

Red River, distant view of, 20; 


crossings of, 29°; Fort Garry on: ' 


its banks, 32 ; divides the popu- 


ry 


lation of settlement, 32, 361; 7 


first steamer on, 34; feasibility 
of communication with- South 
Saskatchewan, 76.; Otter-tail Lake 
its source, 368. 

Red River Settlement—Fort Garry 
its ‘capital, 2; a Red River 
man, 8, 9; Fort Garry, and dis- 
tribution of population in its 

- vicinity, 30-82 ; Protestant and 
Roman Catholic bishops, 32, 352 ; 
first steamer seen there, 34; terri- 
tory likely to gravitate to United 
States, 332 ; first newspaper pub- 


lished there, 352 ; administration - 


of law, 352, 357, 362; cattle, 

agriculture, drainage, wood, la- 

bour, 358, 359 ; population and 
its distribution, 32, 359-362 ; 
population in 1872, 361 ; notices 

of winter climate, 351, 356, 362; 

fire-bagg*of half- breeds (illustra 

-tions), 39, 350. 

Red River, Little, 19. 

Richardson, Sir John, zoological 
notes of, on—Prairie-Fowl, 16, 
17; Passenger Pigeon, 26; Skunk, 
49; Prong-horned Antelope, 57 ; 
American Wolf, 65, 66, 152; 
Fish in the Saskatchewan, 87, 
88; Bison or Buffalo, 91, 103 ; 
Black-tailed Deer, 113 ; Prairie 
Wolf, 122 ; Spotted Grouse, 172 ; 
Siffleur, 191; Dusky . Grouse, 
196; Canada Porcupine, 197 ; 
Rocky Mountain Sheep, 210, 
215 ; Cynthia Cardui, 222 ; Crow, 
223; Ptarmigan, 229 ; Little 


Xe 


* 


449 


Chief Hare, 230 ; Parry’sMarmot, 
231; Flying-Squirrel, 234; Rocky 
, Mountain :Goat, 243; Ruffed 
Grouse, 249; Musk-Rat,* 264 ; 
American Hare, 265 ; Sand-Rat, 
266; Wolverine, 325. 

Rifles. See Guns. 

Roasting Hills, 103, 113. 

Robertson. See Duncan. 

Rochester, 3. 

Rocky Mountains, author's route to 
arranged, 148, 1673 (pack-saddles 
replace carts, 148); far off glimpse, 
172.; distant view of two peaks, 
178 ; view of range, and deserip- 
tion (see illustration), 180 ; out- 
skirts of, M‘Leod and Embarras 

‘Rivers, 186, 187. Enrrance 

“Gores, 189 ; camp in glen, 190 ; 
camp among magnificent heights, 
192; Mount Lindsay (see illus- 
tration), 193. Mepicivg Trent 
VALLEY — mountains’ described 
(see illustration), rivers, trees, 


“194,195 ;, Southesk’s cairn, 196, 


201 ; never before visited, 201 ; 
topography, formation, colouring, 
201, 202; camp in Medicine 
Tent Valley (see illustration), 
195-200. Vanney or Norra 
River entered, 202 ; sheep-hunt- 
‘ing, 220-217 ; snow storm, 217 ; 
topography, 221 ; fossils, 193, 


221; Mount Dalhousie (see illus-. 


tration), 222; vast rocks like 
blocks of masonry, 223; height 
of-land crossed, 229, 230. -Kao- 
TANIE PLAIN, Norra SASKATCH- 
EWAN, 235 ;. height-of-land 
crossed, 237; larches and firs, 238; 
goat-hunting, 240-243 ; lake'ina 
crater, 242. Bow River, 244; 
Assiniboine (small) camp, 244- 
249; stone-flat on summit of 
mountain, 246 ; Mountain-where- 


INDEX. 


* 


‘the-Water-falls, 249 ; Bow Val- 
ley, its large pines, 250; Oxp 
Bow Fort, 252, 254 ; altitude of 
the mountains and valleys, 252, 
253; drawbacks to sport, 253 ; 

- gloom .of the valleys, 228, 254 ; 
outskirts,—hills, plains, trees, 
254; heavy gales, 254, 256 ; 
departure from, carts replace pack- 
saddles, 256, 257. 

Rolette, M., Pembina, 367. 

Roman Catholies. - See Catholics. 

Rowand, Mr., his house, 349. ~ 

Rowland, Mr., Fort Pitt, 140, 141. 

Rowland, a roan horse, 141, 145, 
174, 178, 229, 269. 

Rum. See Spirituous liquors. 

Rupert's Land, Bishop of. See 
Anderson. 


Ss. 


Saddle, author’s. left behind, 8 ; 
brought on by John Mackay, 37. 

Saddles, Spanish, 10, 39, 45. 

St. Ann, mission-house of, 167-169. 

St. Anthony, 8, 370. , 

St. James’s, on the Assiniboine, 33, 

~ 362. 

St. Lawrence, the, 4. 

St. Paul, Minnesota, 7, 37, 370. 

Salt Lake, 48 ;—-near Carlton, 298. 

Saltness, of lakes, 74, ‘90; of 
swamps, 308; of Lake Winnepagos, 
345. , 

Sandflies, 46, 67. 

Sandhill River, 23. 

Sand-rat, The, 266. 

Sandy Hills, the, 71. 

Saskatchewan River, — pronuncia- 
tion and meaning of name, 47 ; 
fish inhabiting, 87, 88. Norra 
Branca or SasKaTCHEWAN, char- 
acter at Elbow, 127; breadth 
at Pitt, 189 ; breadth and charac- 
terat Edmonton, 146; sourceand . 


\ ed 
\ 
Loe 


\ 
Ko 


_ course of North River,ahead-water 
of, 201, 221; Kootanie Plain, 
breadth there, 236; (N. Sask.) 
Elbow reached, 127; crossed at 
Carlton, 129, 132—at Pitt, 139 
—at Edmonton, 146 ; a supposed 
head-water of crossed, 193; val- 
ley of North River, a head- 
water of, 200, 230; heiyht-of- 
land ‘passed, 230; N. Sask. 
-erossed at Kootanie Plain, 236 ; 
height-of-land dividing from, Bow 


‘River (S. Sask.) watershed 
passed, 237; down N, Sask. 
in a boat, 278; frozen in, 


274; camp by river, 274-282 ; 
crossed on the ice, 293, 298. 
Soura Braxce oF Saskat- 
cHewan,—Breadth and character 
at Elbow, 75; Mz, Hind’s esti- 
mate of breadth, 76—of angle of 
Elbow, 77; feasibility of june- 
tion with Red River, 76 ; charac- 
ter below Elbow, 79; breadth 
there, 86; crossed by herd of 
buffalo, 78 ; crossed by author's 
‘party, 89; Bow River, its chief 
head-water, reached, 244; 5. 
Sask, crossed on the ice — its 
breadth, 301. SaskKATCHEWAN 
Disrrict.—Agriculiure—Edmon- 
ton, 148 — Pitt, 286 — Carl- 
ton,7300 — Bow River, 260 ; 
qrazing,— Carlton, 129, 133— 
Pitt, 140, 286—St. Ann, 168; 
district becoming useless to the 
Company, 185 ; “colony might be 
formed there, 286; S. Sask. 


River probably ere long boundary | 


with United States, 332; chain 


of settlements on “N. Sask. River |- 


suggested, 332; N. Sask. River 
best communication between 
Canada and Pacific,333 ; (district) 
peculiarities of dress in, 171, 
233; James 


MiKay belongs | 


INDEX. - 


f 
t 


443 


to,8; Mr. Christie chief dfficer - 
of in 1859- 60, 268 ; Mr. Hardisty 
chief officer of i in 1874, 300. 
Saskatchewan, Little, 47. 
Saulteaux (Ojibways). ‘See Indians, 
Saux Rapids, 11, 368, , 
Sawyer, Colonel, Otter-tail, 367. 
Scarcity of provisions in author’s 
camp, 245, 268. 


Schoolcraft, Mr.,°9, 15, 18, 19, 
370. 

Scottish settlers. See Red River, 
Fort Garry. , 


Scott, Sir Walter, —his heroes, 279. 

Scow (or skiff), a barge, 14,506,129; 
cart-wheel, 22, 23. 

Seneca Lake, 3, 4. 

Settee, Rev. Mr., 
324, 328, 333. 

Shakespeare, plays read on various 
occasions, 54, 64, 135, 137, 146, 
.189, 218, 235, 245, 313, 336; 
remarks on “ Titus Andronicus,” 
218-——on “ Merchant of Venice,” 
235 ; his balancing of good and 
evil in his characters, 219, 278 ; 

“Troilus and Cressida” quoted, 
814, (or remarks at length on 
several plays sce Appendix.) 

Shayenne, river, 20. 

Sheep, Wild, description of, 210; 
plentiful in parts of the Rocky 
Mountains, 167, 180 ; seen, 191; 
ewe shot, 196; ewes, etc., shot, 
198, 199; ram.shot by Munroe, 


Fort Pelly, 323, 


200; ewes and two rams shot, 
205, 206; twelve rams™, shot, 
209-214; very fine ram Texps 


-off ‘reck, 213; measurements of 
heads; 215, 216 ; rams ascend 
precipice, 231; five ewes shot, 
232 ; ewe shot, 236; ewe falls 
over cliff, 240; labour of pur- 
suit, 253 ; Indian woman’s dress 
of skin, 288. 

: Shoal Lake, 49. 


A. 


> 


444 


Simpson, Mr., 42, 43. 
Simpson, Sir George, governor of 


. the Pillageurs at Otter-tail, 18 ; 


Short, James,a Seotch half-breed : | 


drives cart from Crow-wing, 13 ; 
joins author's expedition, 35 ; 
characteristics of, 473; his skill 
with gun or bow, 58; brings in 
cow, 122; chases wolves, 101 ; 
winner in the marrow-bone game, 
101, 102; pelts a badger, 103; 
shoots dueks, 142; appearance 
of, 203; meets a grisly, 206 ; 
shoots wild swans, 265; in the 
“ Golden Era,” 274; hardy winter 
journey, 274, 282; skill in find- 
ing track, 297; makes the track, 
302; reproves a horse, 304; 
farewell, 364. 


Siffeur, The (Arctomys pruinosus), 


described, 191; its whistle heard 
in the mountains, 191; shot by 


. Munroe, 192; quality of its 


meat, 192; shot by author, 198, 
230. 


the Hudson's Bay Company, 1 ; 
author welcomed by, at Lachine, 
4; sets out with author on jour- 
ney to Far West, 5 ; arrives at St. 
Panul—disturbed by rumours of 
floods—starts suddenly for Fort 
Garry, 7; returns, 8; goes with 
author io Minnehaha Falls, 10 ; 
sets out finally for Fort Garry, 
11; travels in a Canadian oa 
13; occupies one of tlie 

with Mr. Hopkins, 15 ; encounters 


his tent defies the thunderstorm, 


22; saluted at Pembina by Saul- | 


teanx Indians, discourages their 
importunity, 27; carried across 
the Vienx Marais by James 
Mackay, 28; arrives at Fort’ 
Garry, 29; departs for Norway 
House, 31; renders ‘invaluable 


assistance {to author, 31; ex-° 


INDEX. 


changes with him farewells, 31 ; 
sottowfal notes of his death in 
1860, 31; reference to his death, 
364, 
Sinclair, Mr., Fort Pitt, 139, 141. 
Sioux. See Indians. 
Sircees. See Indians, 
Skidor, Scandinavian, 317, 318. 
Skunk, The, described, 49; odour 
of, 186; meat of, 175. 
Smallpox, ravages of, 271, 287. 
Smoke-fires, 57, 143, 
Smoke Tent Wood, 315. 
Snake Gnakehill) River, 25, 367, 
Snow-shoes, 302, 314, 335; de- 
scription of, 316, 317. , 
Southesk, Earl of, advised to go to 
Hudson’s Bay Territories for sport 
and healthy climate,1; sails in 
the Africa for New York, 2; 
thence travels by Niagara, 3; to 
Lachine, 4; where he meets Sir———— 
~~ George Simpson, governor of the - 
Hudson’s Bay Company's Terri- 
tories, 4, He sets out thence with 
Sir George for Fort Garry, 5; 
travels by rail and Mississippi 
steamer to St. Paul, Minnesota, - 
7; (where the party is joined by — 
Dr. Rae, 9); stays there a few 
days, 7-11; travels by stage wag- 
gon to Crow-wing, 12; thence 
rides across the plains to Fort 
Garry, 13-29; where -he parts 
from Sir George, 31; and stays a 
fortnight engaging men, buying 
horses, and organising an expedi- «  - 
tion to the Far West, 30-89. He 
sets out thence, and travels due 
west, 40; arrives at Fort Ellice 
on the Assiniboine, 50 ;- thence 
proceeds across the plains, shoot- 
ing cabrees, ducks, ete., to Qu’ap- 
pelle Fort, 59; where he meets 
with a band of Ojibways, 59-63 ; ; 
continues due west, shoots a few 


buffalo bulls, ete. ‘arrives at the | 
Indian Elbow, 65-74 ; crosses the | 
South Saskatchewan lower down, 
89; falls in with a vast herd of 
buffalo, and has good sport near 
Eagle Creek, 91-103 ; and after- 
wards at Cherry Bush, where he 
camps near a band of hunters 
from Carlton, 103-126; makes | 
an excursion to the Bad Hill, | 
(never before visited by a Euro- 
pean), and shoots buffaloes and a 
grisly bear, 108-118 ; travels to 
Fort Carlton, 129; and thence 
by Fort Pitt, 139 ; to Fort Ed- 
monton, the principal post of 
the Saskatchewan district, 147 ; 
where he stays a few days, pre- 
paring for an expedition to the- 
Rocky Mountains, 147-165. He 
sets out, 166; visits Roman 


167 ; travels through a swampy | 
and thickly-wooded country to 
the M‘Leod River (a tributary of 
the Athabasca), 169-175 ; meets 
with a band of Iroquois hunters, 
180 ; leaves the Jasper’s House 
track, 187 ; proceeds up the Em- 
barras River through an unfre- 
quented country, 185-188 ; enters 
the mountains, 189; arrives at 
the magnificent valley of the 
Medicine Tent River, a chief 


_ head-water of the Athabasca (a | 


place never before visited by a 
European), 193: erects a cairn 
ou a mountain at the head of that 
valley, 196, 201 ; passes into the 
valley of the North River (a large 
head-water of the North Sas- 
katchewan), 202; has excellent 
sport among the mountain sheep, 
209-217; descends the valley, 
223 ; subsequently ascends, and 
tracks to its source, one of the 


. 


— INDEX. 


Catholic Mission_of Lake St..Ann, | _ 


445 - 


branches of the river (the horses 
being token over great obstacles, 
229), 225-230; and passes to 
the ‘watershed of the 
stream of the North Saskatche- 
wan, 220; proceeds to that 
stream, and travels up its course 
to Kootanie Plain, 235: rafts 
across the North Saskatchewan. 
there, 236 ; passes over a height- 
of-land to a tributary of the Bow 
River, 237; near which shoots 
mountain sheep and goats, 238- 
243 ; descends to the Bow River 
(the main head-water of the South 
Saskatchewan), 244 ; abtains sup- 
plies there from a small camp 
of Christian Assiniboines (or 
Stontes), 245-249; and atfter- 
wards from a larger camp, at Old 
Bow Fort, at the point where the 


iver leaves_the mountains, 254- 


260 ; proceeds across the plains, 
261 ; and arrives at Fort Edmon- 
ton (where signs of winter,appeay), © 
268-272. He embarks in a boat, 
intending to go down the North 
Saskatchewan to Carlton, 273; a 
snow-storm arises, 274 ; and the 
river is suddenly frozen up, 274 ; 
men are despatched to Fort Pitt 
for horses, he meanwhile passes a 


fortnight on the river bank, 274- 


horses arrive, 282; he 
proceeds to Fort Pitt, 285; and 
thence to Fort Carlton, 298: 
continues the journey on horse- 
back (men and horses suffering 
much from the cold), 301; halts a 
day at Touchwood Hills, 309-311; 
arrives at length at Fort Pelly, 
near the river Assiniboine, 321 ; 
and stays there a fortnight, 329- 
333. Dog-sleighs are procured, 
he resumes his journey, 334; 
travels to Duck Pay Post, 340; 


main: - 


J 


446 INDEX. 


~ 


\ 


thence on the ice of Winnepagos 
and Manitobah Lakes, to Mr. 
Monkman’s house, 346; thence 
to White Horse Plains, 348 ; 
next day arrives at Fort Garry, 
350 ;—where he remains for 
a fortnight, 351-365. He again 
sets ont, 366; and travels with 
dog-sleighs to .Crow-wing, near 
the Mississippi, 368 ; thence by 
etage-waggon to St. Paul, 370; 
after which by stage and rail to 
New York,°370. He passes a 
few days there, then returns in 
the Etna to England, 371, 

Southesk’s Cairn, 196, 201, 

Spirituous liquors, smuall quantity 
of in author's stores, 36; all left 
at .Carlton, 131; merits of, con- 
trasted with those of tea, 177, 
208, 209; Jove of Indians for, 
155, 163, 288, 329, 357; their 
abuse, drunkenness of Indians, 
17, 128, 163, 327, 328, 357, 
369 ; ruin brought to Indians by 
free trade in, 326, 327; never 
used by the Hudson’s Bay Com- 
pany as a medium ‘of traffic with 
Indians,—not allowed to enter 
the nérthern districts, 327 ; laws 
at Fort Garry regulating trade in, 
352, 357, 358, 

Spot-on-a-Saddle Lake, 283. 

Spots-in-the-sky, an Ojibway, 61,62. 

Springs, The, 136, 297. 

Spur, wooden, 176. 

Stalkers, memoranda for, 239. 

Stars, 170, 183, 224, 263, 274, 


281, 297, 305; horses’ eyes 
shining like stars, 190. 
Stonies (Assiniboines) See Indians. 


Stony Valley, 69. 

Strawberries, wild, 90, 135, 

Sturgeon Creek, 40, 349 j~near St. 
Ann, 169. 

Sun— two false suns, 308 ; sunshine, 


7 


on a burut pine-forest, 177—on 
_the mountains, 180—in the deep 
‘mountain valleys, 228, 254—on 
snowy ‘hills, 297; sunset, at 
Qu'appelle Fort, 64—near Fort 
Edmonton, 146——near the M‘Leod 
_ River, 177—~opposite moonrise, 
267, 296. - 
Superior, Lake, 7. 
Surgical cases, ‘Indian cures, 329. 
Swan Creek, 14; Lake, 336, 
Swans, wild, 264, 265, 
Sykes, Sir Francis, Bart, 343, 344. 


T 


Taché, Bishop of St. Boniface, 32, 
352, 

Tait, a half-breed, leader of 2 
party of hunters from Fort Carl- 
ton; surprises author's camp, 99 ; 


author's party camp near his at. 


Cherry Bush, 104 ; brings bis 
child to visit author, ‘04 ; ‘shoots 
a grisly bear, 119 ; travels with 
author to Carlton, 126; rides 
with him to horse-guard there, 
129; author visits Mrs, Tail, 
131. me 

Target practice, 54, 55, 58. 

Taylor, Rev. Mr, 34, 362. 

Taylor, Mr., Tonchwood Hills, 309. 

Taylor, a half- breed voyageur, drives 
author's dog-cariole from Fort 
Pelly—cheeks a frostbite, 336 ; 
his vocabulary, 337, 388 ; good- 
natured to his dogs, 340 ; makes 
eighteen hours’ journey to White 
Horse Plains, 347, 348. 

Tea, 14, 35, 131, 177,209. 

Thick Brush Creek, 173. 

Thunderstorms, 21, 28, 45, 46, 48, 


50, 54, 57, 65, 96, 145, 172, 


176, 186. 
Timber, See Trees. 
Tobacco, 36, 60, 217. 


INDEX. 


Toma (Thomas Ariwakenha), 


an | 


Troquois, canoe-man of Sir George | 


Simpson, 5 ; drives waggon, 13 ; 
carries author across Vieux Ma- 
rais, 28; attached to author's 
expedition, 31, 35 ; characteris- 
tics of, 47; ferries author dcross 
Saskatchewan, 89 ; shoots a bull, 
97; facetiousness of, 200; 

appearance of, 203 ; catches trout, 
256; in the “ Golden Era,” 
274; winter attire, 292; his 


cooking referred to, 90, 235, "251, i 


315, > 

Toronto, 5, 23. 

Touchtwood Hills Fort,.309, 312, 

Trees,—earlier in leaf near Chicago 
than in Canada, 6; spoilt by 
half-breeds—lob-sticks, 44, 251; 
of large size scarce, 139 ; burnt 
wood near St. Ann, 166; 
down by beavers, 171,'267 ; fire 
the curse of, in Rocky: Mountain 
district, 250 ; brutal destruction 
of throughout America, 251; 
lovely autumnal tints, 254 ; tree 
nearly falls on author, 321 ; 
scarce in Red River district, 338 ; 
crack and split from frost, 367. 

. ELMs, fine, nen White Horse 

Plains, 348. ... Fins, fine group 
by Crow-witig, River, 15; plen- 
tiful between Edmonton and 
Rocky Mountains, 166 ; sharp- 
“ness of broken dead branches, 
171, 226 ; of good growth, 187 ; 
in Medicine Tent Valley, 195 ; 
author’s name marked on /one, 
200; growth-levelnear Bow River, 
238 ; large specimen of-the silver 

_ tribe, 250... . Lancuus,afewseen, 
172; growth-level near Bow River 
—peculiar, habit, 238; a few in 
lower valley of Bow River, 250 ; 
smali, neamSwan Lake, 336... . 
Marta, fine wood of near Lake 


* 
> 


i 
H 


i 


cut | 


447 


Forty-four, 20... . aKa, copses of, 
west from Chicago Plain, 6 ; used 
for axle-trees, 54 ; in a glen near 
Quappelle River, 69, 129, 
Pines, of good grow th near Crow- 
wing, 14; ruins of burnt, 1723 
burnt forest of in sunlight, 177 ; 
beauty of in relight, 190 ; in 
Medicine Tent Valley, 195 ; dense 
woods, 221; large specimens in 
Bow River lower valley, 250; 
quality of as fuel, 306; camp 
among snow-clad, 337 . ‘ 
‘ Poprars, 44; islands of, 53, 
126, etc. ; stamp peculiar charac- 
ter on landscape, 133; preva-; 
lence of, 44, 139, 172, 306, ete. ; 


forest of immense, 175 ; quality | 


of as fuel, 306 ... . Sprucss, 
mixed with poplar, 44, 139; 

forest of immense, 175 ; “of good 
growth’ but spoilt by Indians, 
‘187 ; in Medicine Tent Valley, 
195 ;  growth-level near Bow 
River, 238-; large specimens in 


lower valley of Bow River, 250; - 


fine black, 321. 
Turtle Creek, 138, 295 ; Mountain, 
344, 
Vv 


Vermont, a well-bred bay, pony, 
10, 13, 48, 63, 122, 129, 298. 
Vienx Marais, 28, 


Ww 


Wabashaw, 370. 

Waggon, 10, 13, 35, 70. 

Wasp's nest disturbed, 174. 

Water, scarcity of pure, 115. 

Waterspout, 21. 

Watson, Mx., Fort Garry, 30. 

Wawpooss, a white pony, a buffalo- 
runner, 37, 58, 71, 73, 80, 91, 
119, 138, 157. . 

Wenona, 370. 


# 


448 


Wesley, Rev. John, quoted, 233. 
Whisky, a fat Indian dog, attaches 
himself to the party, 134 ;-the 
cause of his fatness, 153 ; ridicu- 
lous in crossing a river, and absurd 
~in general, 179 ; carries a siffleur’s 
head, 192; follows author up a | 
steep mountain, 196; and out 
sheep-stalking—alarmed bya tele- 
scope, 211; in peril, 212 ;.mar-’ 
rowly escapes a falling ram, 213 ; 
oe fancy for climbing rocks, 228 ; 
I his -diggust at being muzzled, 
. 261; his selfish desertion of the 
party, 274,--- - 
‘ White Horse Plains, 40, 348 ; 
settlers’ houses at, 349. 
White Mud Lake, 137, 295; River, 
268; River, 315 ; Creck, 283. 
Winipeg, Lake, 
at northern -extremity, 31; a 
means for communicating with | 
Pacific from Canada,"332 ; mean- 
ing of name, 345; Red River. 
flows into it, 351, 368. 

___ WV innepagos, Lake, meaning and 
accentuation of name, 345 ; its 
shores and bays, 341; its con-. 
nection with Lake Manitobah, 
342; thickness and quality of its 


ice, 341, 342; its size, 345 5 | 
saline tendencies, 345 ; party 
travel on the ice of, 337 ; arrive 
at Duck Bay Post on, 340 ; cross 


_~ Heck of land separating it from 
Lake Manitobah, 341, 
Winter landscapes, 295, 297. 
Wolf Hills, 57. . ; 
Wolf River, 176. 
Wolverine, The, 324, 325. f 


INDEX. \ u 


Norway House j 


York Factory, 5, 366. 7 e ‘ 


Wolves, — Trx LARGE AMERICAN 


Wo tr—-described:,65, 66; a white 
male prowls round camp, 66; a 
white male enters camp, and. is 
shot, 68 ; a white male unsuccess- 
fully run, 71; a lame white female 
shot, 85; a sleeping one stoned, 
102; a ‘male shot at, 108; a 
white male svounded, 137; a 
white female‘ shot, 142. THE 
Prarriz-wolr—described, 122; . 
a male wounded, 55 ; ayoung male © 
shot, 67; scared by moonlight,’ 
101; two shot, 122. WoLvEs 
(uxcLasstrrED), their howling, 24, 
70, 123, 135, 146; their preda- 
tory, habits; 192; their attacks on 
the buffalo, 79, 118, 123; their 
crossing With the Indian dog, 153; 
their use as food, 122; their attacks 
on horses, 176,184, 


Woolsey, Rev. Thomas, Wesleyan 


missionary in the Edmonton dis- 


. - trict: meets author at Fort Ed- 


monton, 147 ; gives him informa- 
tion, especially as to the Cree 
syllabic characters, (see Appen- 
dix), 148, 151; condnets the 
Sunday services, 158 ; leaves the 
Fort, 164 ; author meets Assini- 
boines visited by him, 258; on 
4 missionary tour, 268 ; reference 
to his ministration amoug the 
Assiniboines, 355, also see his 
letter in Appendix. 


‘ _ 


¥ 


oo 


-t 


THE END, 


re aunssea asta a 
Srey 
ariete 


os 


        
