,X^ 
-:^^-o^     ^^:Vo^     ^-A'S^o^'    -V^^S-o^     /^\Xo^  '         -  --^..^ 
°^'A 
,^^0. 
,^^  -3.     - 
Ao 
>^    .^^ 
^     ^ 
/   .^^"^ 
\..>^^ 
■^°^. 
V"-^ 
'  % 
6 
/  ''^ 
^^,,/%-^,^p:^./'^v 
■^^d< 
^  Of.    ''.'■■  ^'^'  i-  '    <i^  q^ 
•>;■ 
"^ 
.i^l^f^' 
■  *  v^' 
.s'=  -^  -  Mite* "  ^"^  ^-  '  ^^ 
'>    .^y 
*^"<C-. 
,  <^:i^"^'\  ,  cc^---'''^-%     <^;;^'X     ^^^^'%     ^^^^'^      ^^:^-°'- 
v^^^ 
f^'^^^^^W^^J^^ 
•%.    -^^      '-  V,^^ 
c.'i  -^ 
^0^ 
.*^  -^  %^^^.^^  -^  ^^^.v^/"^  \^:.f^%  %^^/,#%  \*^^/,#% 
^^0^ 
,>}--^        %. 
,^^<3^ 
V 
<i^    Q,. 
\ 
V 
--,  J.--      ■,, 
,/\  %%..^..  ,# 
[ 
cS>   ^ 
^     '^.^^j^^.  ^-    -:^     ^>^.\r^"    "^     ^.>.:.>^  .^  .#     ^ 
3  ^.       -  c'i  ^^ 
lN' 
,^>  -^    = 
"'..s^      At' 
.N' 
,<}-^  ^ 
'^^0^ 
^^^°- 
^/.d* 
:  .^  °- 
^r-X;"^"^^^--%"'°-"  N^--%" 
^  .^  ^ "  ^  ^  "^.^  ''i^^^ "%..  .>j^  'V   ■  °'  x^'   ^ "  ■■  °'  "^ 
0"     s 
"-  ^^ 
<^ 
-0^ 
<-.  ■ 
^'*^^.'    %.  o^       .\-/*ii<' 
C\.  \  ^  •*  I        >^.  ^Ci^  s  '  *  ^ 
,^  ^'*-     ^ 
N)^...^.^'"'^"/;.-,.^--^ 
<c«-' 
,vC^  o,. 
o5    Q.. 
Z  ■  -7     Z  > 
n)^,^=«,% 
*      •O.v 
.>^-^. 
' ' . .  s  -    aC> 
f.-L'.<<::-^^<f.-L'.^-~^.-''.<<:--^<f.-:j.<^ 
c"  . 
/•►^>»-  '^      -^ 
C"   . 
0"   . 
rf^iOSii. 
c^\- 
'CJL 
,r7U 
M  1. 
^^W^*V  nvaf.  Vir€^'Ll-i-lX.C  CUt^,  f  Oei'  ift»o  )  v-  c^^.  /yC: 
.-^,'i'Ki^^:^. 
OUR  exijedition,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  10th 
of  June,  left  the  hill  back  of  the  apostolic 
capital  of  Minnesota,  wliere  the  tents  had  been 
pitched  and  the  messes  made  up  the  night  before. 
^^y»^tC^ 
The  scene  had  been  one  of  great  confusion  iire- 
vious  to  loading  the  carts  and  jmcking  the  mules 
—these  the  last  sad  offices  before  burying  our- 
selves in  the  prairies  of  the  Northwest  out  of 
sight  of  civilization.  Crowds  of  citizens  from 
St.  Paul  and  vicinity  were  present  during  the 
ceremony.  All  about  the  camp-ground  were 
scattereiLdur  provisions,  sacks  of  iiour  and  sugar 
c//// 
V 
VW»Va^  .  V%/' 
% 
/ 
f 
u 
CASCADE  NEAR  BT.  PACIi. 
and  beans,  ban-els  of  pork  and  bags  of  dried  beef, 
bags  of  dried  apples  and  sacks  of  coffee,  canis- 
ters of  tea  and  kegs  of  powder,  bags  of  shot  and 
I'hunks  of  lead,  rifles,  shot-guns,  and  pistols, 
Iilankets — blue,  red,  white,  and  green ;  fishing- 
rods,  pack-saddles,  cart-harness,  tents  and  tent- 
poles,  tin  kettles,  iron  saucepans,  tin  plates,  car- 
|)et-bags,  Talises,  soap-boxes,  axes,  and  buffiilo- 
robes,  butcher-knives  and  spy-glasses,  and  a  liun- 
dred  things  besides — some  useful  and  some  use- 
less— relics  of  ciyilization  which  now  lie  scattered 
along  the  valley  of  the  Red  River  of  the  North 
and  the  prairies  of  the  Saskatchewan,  one  by  one 
thrown  away  as  their  owners  drew  the  line  be- 
tween luxuries  and  necessities,  in  passing  from 
citizens  to  nomads. 
At  length  the  carts  were  loaded,  horses  har- 
nessed, mules  packed,  and  horsemen  mounted. 
"The  Colonel"  led  the  train,  driving  a  light  sulky 
(■arrying  the  odometer  and  other  scientific  in- 
struments. Balky  horses  were  spurred  up,  re- 
fractory mules  flogged,  and  amidst  hundreds  of 
•'Good-byes,"  "Write  me  from  Frazer  River," 
"My  compliments  to  the  Saskatchewan,"  "Send 
back  the  biggest  nuggets  you  find,"  "Let  me 
give  you  a  pass  over  the  Rocky  Mountains,"  one 
after  another  wheeled  into  line,  and  the  expedi- 
tion was  fairly  started  on  its' 
long  journey. 
Three-fourths  of  our  twenty 
were  bound  to  Frazer  River  to 
dig  for  gold ;  the  rest  were  in 
search  of  treasures  of  anoth- 
er sort — health,  knowledge,  a 
summer's  recreation,  science, 
personal  inspection  of  the 
Northwestern  areas  and  the  . 
reat  rivers  by  which  they  are 
linked  to  our  own  Northwest- 
ern States. 
We  outfitted  at  St.  Paul, 
and  spent  a  fortnight  of  fine 
unimcr  weatlier,  when  we 
ought  to  have  been  traveling, 
in  making  our  purchases,  be- 
c,inning  witli  horses.  [Eulo- 
gy of  Western  horse-jockeys  is 
Iiere  omitted  for  want  of  room, 
riie  sentiments  of  the  writer 
^\  ill  be  intelligibly  conveyed  by 
the  picture  on  the  next  page, 
containing  portraits  of  animals 
tftered  for  our  purchase  by 
members  of  that  virtuous  and 
enlightened  profession.] 
My  friend  Joseph  bought  a 
mare  whom  he  conceived  to  be 
profoundly  penetrated  with  a 
grave  consciousness  of  the  part 
she  was  performing  in  opening 
an  international  higliway  across 
the  continent.  "  Observe," 
said  he,  "  the  pensile  head, 
the  meditative,  lacklustre  eye, 
the  impressive  solemnity  of  her 
slowly  measured  tread.  See 
how  she  restrains  the  natural  levity  of  her  dis- 
position, and  represses  that  exuberance  of  an- 
imal spirits  which  one  might  expect  from  a  horse 
in  the  very  blush  and  dew  of  equine  adolescence 
— for  the  man  I  liought  her  of  s^\'ore  she  was  only 
six  years  old.  Let  her  be  called  Lady  Mary." 
For  my  own  part,  I  bought  a  horse  of  Indian 
origin  and  aboriginal  habits*-lazy,  tough,  balky, 
jocose,  sagacious,  and  of  a  conservative  habit — 
afterward  called  "Dan  Rice."  Together  we 
bought  a  mule  to  draw  our  kit  and  cargo  in  a 
cart  of  the  Red  River  pattern.  Each  of  us  had 
an  India-rubber  blanket,  two  pair  of  heavy  woolen 
blankets,  arms  and  ammunition,  fishing-tackle,  be- 
sides the  cooking  utensils,  compass,  hammer  and 
nails,  pail,  water-keg,  axe,  scj-the,  shovel,  rope, 
string,  and  jack-knife,  which  we  owned  in  com- 
mon. For  wearing  apparel  the  best  average  was : 
a  soft  felt  hat,  three  or  four  blue  flannel  shirts, 
with  three  or  four  pockets  in  each.  A  full  snit 
of  Canada  blue  or  stout  doeskin,  with  an  extra 
pair  of  trowsers.  One  pair  of  duck  cloth  over- 
alls. Boots  or  higli  shoes,  with  projecting  soles 
to  keep  the  prairie-grass  from  cutting  through 
the  uppers. 
Whoever  goes  to  Frazer  River  hereafter  by  the 
northern  overland  route  will  please  listen  to  two 
7-2- 
* 
"^^f^  %f 
UORBE-JOCKETTNG. 
items  of  advice,  or  skip  to  the  nest  paragraph. 
Item  first — -the  same  which  Punch  gave  to  a 
young  couple  about  marrying — "  Don't !"  But 
if  he  insists  upon  going — item  second — let  him 
not  travel  five  hundred  miles  north  with  loaded 
carts  before  beginning  on  his  half-continent  of 
westing.  Messrs.  Buvbank  and  Blakely,  of  St. 
Paul,  have  had  a  line  of  stages  this  summer  from 
that  city  to  the  head  of  narigation  on  the  Red 
River  of  the  North;  and  the  steamboat  Anson 
Northiip,  owned  by  them  in  shares  with  the  Hud- 
son's Bay  Company,  now  connects  that  terminus 
with  the  Selkirk  Settlement.  Let  the  emigrant 
outfit  at  St.  Paul,  send  his  provisions  to  Fort  Gar- 
ry by  the  route  named,  and  there  buy  carts  and 
fresh  horses  and  make  an  early  start. 
It  was  a  motley  crowd.  There  was  the  man 
of  monstrous  egotism,  who  passed  his  life  in  the 
contemplation  and  exposition  of  bis  own  achieve- 
ments and  Wrtues,  and  men  of  no  virtue  at  all ; 
the  enthusiast,  and  the  man  who  ridicided  all 
anthusiasm ;  the  man  who  believed  every  thing, 
»nd  the  man  who  believed  notliing ;  men  of  good 
principle,  'men  of  b.ad  principle,  and  men  of  no 
principle;  scholars  and  ignoramuses;  industri- 
ous men  and  lazy  men ;  sick  men,  who  could  be 
floored  with  a  rush,  and  well  men  that  a  bull 
would  hesitate  before  trying  to  butt  over ;  water 
drinkers  and  whisky  drinkers;  men  that  were 
boys,  and  boys  that  were  men ;  Nova  Scotians 
and  Indian  half-breeds,  Scotchmen  and  Canadi- 
ans, English,  American,  and  Irish ;  and  but 
three  tents-fnl  in  all. 
There  were  with  us  two  doctors,  to  look  after 
our  healths,  and  an  accomplished  scientific  gen- 
tleman, a  geologist  and  botanist,  who  afterward 
descended  the  Assiuiboine  River  from  Fort  EUice, 
in  a  canoe,  with  only  a  single  Indian  guide,  as- 
certaining the  n.avigability  of  the  stream  in  the 
spring  of  the  year  to  small  boats,  and  in  neai'ly 
all  seasons  to  batteaux— one  of  the  few  result's 
accomplished  by  the  expedition. 
Oiu-  first  day's  journey  was  a  very  short  one. 
Horses  and  mules  had  to  be  weaned  from  the 
quotidian  oats  of  civilization,  and  taught  to  rec- 
oncile themselves  to  grass  and  water.  The  fa- 
tigues of  the  journey  had  to  be  begun  adaf/!o, 
and  then  crescendo.  A  s/or:an(!o  movement  at 
the  start  wonld  have  knocked  them  up  in  a  week. 
We,  too,  had  to  be  weaned.  We  found  this 
out  at  the  first  camping-ground.  Instead  of 
ringing  for  coals  and  ordering  a  chop,  we  had  to 
cliop  our  wood  and  build  our  fires  and  fry  our 
own  pork.  The  streams,  which  are  the  Crotons 
and  Cochitnates  of  the  prairies,  had  to  make  con- 
nection with  our  temporary  bouses  by  wooden 
pails  instead  of  iron  pipes,  and  we  to  "leant  how 
much  easier  it  is  to  reach  a  bell-rope  and  ttrni  a 
foucet  than  to  be  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of 
water. 
Riding  in  the  sun  and  the  labor  and  excite- 
ment of  starting  had  given  us  the  appetites  of 
Brobdignagians.  Visions  of  savory  messes, 
clouds  of  fragrant  steam,  in  which  Soyer  tlie 
immortal  seemed  enjoying  perpetual  apotheosis, 
floated  through  our  minds  as  we  pitched  the 
tents  and  drove  their  stakes,  stacked  the  gims 
and  spread  our  blankets  for  the  night,  and  then 
waiteil  and  listened  for  the  call  to  sup])er.  Pres- 
ently it  came,  and  in  the  one  word  "Gruh!" 
and  grub  it  was.  Tlie  tea,  virgin  as  when  gath- 
ered in  the  gardens  of  the  celestials,  had  impart- 
*aE~ 
BED  BIVEB  OUIDE. 
ed  none  of  its  virtue  to  the  ravishing  hot  water, 
and  the  decoction  which  we  poured  into  our  tiii 
cups  from  the  new  tin  tea-pot  desen-ed  no  better 
name  than  hot  slops.  We  asked  for  bread  and 
received  a  stone,  or  at  least  something  so  com- 
pact, solid,  and  yet  springy,  that  if  it  could  be 
produced  in  sufficient  quantities  it  might  super- 
sede the  pavements  of  New  York,  with  danger 
to  horses,  profit  to  the  contractor,  and  .additfon 
to  the  general  filth— the  three  essentials.  Fried 
salt  pork  was  the  piece  dc  resistance. 
These  were  our  bad  beginnings,  however.  We 
had  not  then  got  into  the  region  of  game.  Sub- 
sequently we  had  bread  as  light  and  good  as 
could  be  desired,  and  banqueted  on  flcsb,  fish, 
and  fowl  of  an  infinite  variety.  Even  Delmon- 
ico  denies  you  the  pleasure  which  we  had— of 
shooting  your  own  bird,  picking,  dressing,  and 
salting  it,  and  impaling  the  cadaver  upon  a  sharp 
stick,  there  to  broil  over  the  coals  of  the  camp- 
fire  into  exquisite  yellows  and  browns.  And  a 
venison  steak  with  the  costliest  accompaniments, 
in  a  fciur-walled  restaurant,  is  not  to  be  ]ireferred 
to  a  buftalo  steak  at  supper,  bought  by  a  four- 
mile  chase.  Nor  did  bread  and  pork"  and  tea 
comprise  all  our  bill  of  fare.  Some  of  the  no- 
mads whom  civilization  was  sloughing  ofli'  still 
clung  to  the  fare  to  which  they  had  been  accus- 
tomed; and  visitors  came,  bringing  in  secret 
pockets  mysterious  black  bottles,  containing,  if 
all  we  have  heard  is  true,  chalk,  marble  dust, 
opium,  tobacco,  henbane,  oil  of  vitriol,  copperas, 
alum,  strychnine,  and  other  exhilarating  bever- 
ages. 
THK   nLATELES-S   a^UL£. 
isjiges  and  leuns  conrinoaUr  pa^ed  ns,  and 
«n-  campJife  as  Tet  lacked  the"seclnsion  which 
gives  it  iC5  charm.      Some  of  ns  irere  eT«i  ireai 
loir-cascs  of  ciTiltxation  to  the  blankets  of  bartm- 
nans,  and  ggioall^  fonnd  oor  irar  at  smtdovn 
.  ^- --^    lo  some  inn. 
-T«er*ewh„esbe«s  and  linen  pa- 1      StiH.  Jong  this  m«*d  tbo,.:ngh&Te.  anO 
wiih    these    dilotion? 
of  campJife,  »©  ice: 
■iriih  some  sharp  con- 
feasts.      3It  sietch- 
hook  contains,   vj<m 
consecntiTe  psges,  a 
picmre  of  the  Astor- 
like  ••  Feller  Honi¥." 
at    a.    Pad.    who* 
I     slept    one    nicfct, 
and   the   "Tiareier's 
Hoine-~  where  I  ask- 
ed for  '•  someihin"'  to 
eat"  on  the  nest  ^t. 
Otir    road    passed 
OTer   rwo    iribntaries 
of  the   Mississipfa — 
Eli  Kirer  and  Rnm 
Ki^r.     g^ng  fresh- 
ets had  carried  awav 
their  bridges,  and  we 
cncBsed  hr  means  of 
temporary   rope   fer' 
ries.    Oct  Rem  Riv- 
er  ferry,  near  Ancia. 
we  were  carried  free- 
Enterprising    citixezj? 
reasoned     with     the 
~  -       "     "le    boat 
riotjcallr 
-V  i 
.-hi 
cooditioB  a5 
the   pioneer? 
great  Xorrbwest  Ex- 
ploring Espeditjon. 
That  hodr.  when  it 
had    crossed,    origan- 
"— iT  cvEj  tm  xi\:ix. 
ONE  or  orK  DOcroES. 
ized  itself  into  a  convention  and  passed  the  fol- 
lowing resolutions : 
"ITAerwi^  by  the  kindness  of  the  citizens  of  Anoka  vre 
have  been  ferried  over  Rum  River  free, 
**  Resoh-ftl^  That  we  tender  them  our  heartfelt  thanks : 
"  Resolv€d^  Tliat  we  are  deeplv  sensible  of  the  able  and 
3killful  manner  in  which  the  ferrjiuan  managed  his  pole, 
and  his  assistant  the  rudder,  in  the  trying  transit  of  Rum 
River; 
"  Besolved^  That  we  are  devontly  gratefnl  that  the  rope 
did  not  break  and  leave  03  tc  the  mercy  of  winds  and 
waves ; 
"  i?f5oriYd,  That  we  cordially  unite  in  recommending 
to  Charon,  the  proprietor  of  the  Styx  ferry-boat,  to  re- 
frain frwm  demanding  the  usual  two  oboli  from  the  citi- 
zens of  Anok  -.  and  the  ferryman  of  Rum  River." 
These  resolutions  were  adopted  nem.  con.  The 
chairman  was  about  to  put  the  motion  to  adjourn 
to  a  quarter  where  the  ram  was  not  so  liberally 
diluted  as  in  the  stream  just  crossed,  when  the 
gentleman  who  had  offered  the  resolutions  stepped 
on  top  of  a  pile  of  flour-sacks  in  his  cart  and  ex- 
claimed, 
"  Mr.  Chairman,  before  we  adjourn  allow  me 
to  make  a  few  brief  remarks  on  a  subject  in  which 
we  are  all  deeply  interested.  Xeed  I  say  that  I 
siUiide  to  the  great  Northwest  Exploring  Expe- 
dition ?"  [Hear  !  hear !  Go  on !  go  on !  Three 
cheers  for  the  Saskatchewan .'] 
The  exigencies  of  space  compel  the  omission 
of  the  speaker's  apology  for  a  want  of  prepara- 
tion for  the  occasion  and  his  brilliant  exordium. 
The  following  extracts  are  taken  from  the  man- 
uscript which  he  drew  from  his  pock- 
et a  few  moments  later.  1  have  en- 
deavored to  relieve  the  dryness  of 
his  discourse  by  interpolating  a  few 
sketches  of  the  members  of  our  par- 
ty, as  they  appeared  at  various  points  . 
of  the  journey. 
"The  discovery  of  gold  in  Frazer 
Kiver  and  its  tributaries  depopulated 
many  of  the  small  towns  of  Califor- 
nia in  a  few  short  weeks.  Tracts  of 
land,  once  thickly  settled  and  well 
tilled,  were  emptied  of  inhabitants 
and  left  as  free  of  the  plow  as  they 
were  before  gold  was  discovered  in 
that  El  Dorado.  Emigrants  came 
from  the  East  too,  but  passed  on  by 
the  Golden  Gate  and  entered  the 
Straits  of  Juan  de  Fuca  on  their 
w,ay  to  the  newer  and  more  northern 
El  Dorado.  Shall  we  wonder,  then, 
that  the  Californians  have  said  Fra- 
zer Kiver  is  a  humbug?  Nay,  rath- 
er let  us  rejoice.  Shall  any  croaker 
say  we  count  our  eggs  before  thev 
are  hatched  ?  Perhaps  we  do ;  but 
it  is  because  the  eggs  are  golden  ones, 
and  we  are  sure  of  our  goose 
"But  the  emigration  is  already 
sufficient  to  make  the  question  of 
routes  all  important.  Some  may 
like  to  go  around  the  Horn,  but  not 
a  Western  man ;  that  is  not  his  way 
of  treating  horns.  WTio  wants  to 
be  huddled  like  cattle  between  the 
decks  of  a  rickety  old  steamer  for  weeks  and 
months?  ArVho  wants  to  go  from  London  to 
Paris  by  the  way  of  Jericho?  The  best  gold 
fields  are  in  the  head  waters  of  Frazer  River, 
close  to  the  Rocky  Mountains,  just  over  the  way. 
We  take  the  short  cut 
"To  use  the  words  of  a  distinguished  writer: 
'  Various  causes  have  been  approaching  their 
crisis  of  consequence  with  a  remarkably  synchro- 
nous movement.'  The  license  of  the  Hudson 
Bay  Company  has  just  expired.  The  land  which 
they  have  shut  out  the  world  from  is  open  to 
capital  and  labor.  British  Columbia  has  been 
organized.  People  are  hearing  of  the  northward 
deflection  of  the  isothermals  west  of  the  great 
lakes.  Bulwer's  prophecy,  of  a  cordon  of  fi-ee 
States  all  along  our  nonhem  boundan-,  may  yet 
be  realized.  Ten  ye.ars  ago  who  knew  that 
northwest  of  Chicago  lies  an  inhabitable  area 
bigger  than  the  whole  United  States  east  of  the 
Mississippi,  included  between  the  same  lines  of 
latitude  which  box  the  great  grain-growing  dis- 
tricts of  Central  Europe?  Japan  is  opening,  and 
the  Amoor  gajies  to  receive  her  coming  thousands. 
Oregon  and  Washington  Territories  are  swelling 
into  magnificence,  and  the  eyes  of  wide-awake 
philosophers  already  see  in  the  Northern  Pacific 
the  Mediterranean  of  the  future 
"  And  what  a  magnificent  river  system  is  that 
of  the  Northwestern  areas — a  system  by  itself! 
Think  me  not  stupid  because  I  am  statistical. 
The  Red  River  of  the  North  hooks  its  head  wa- 
ters in  among  the  head  waters  of  the  Mississippi. 
Then  it  sends  its  waters  lumdreds  of  miles  north 
to  Lake  Winnipeg,  tlie  centre  of  the  system. 
That  lalce  is  two  liundred  miles  long,  navigjible 
for  any  class  of  vessels.  Its  nuiin  tributaiy  is 
the  Saskatchewan  [cheers],  navigable  to  tlic  very 
shadows  of  the  Rocky  Mountains.  Of  this  coun- 
try, big  enongli  to  make  half  a  dozen  first-class 
States,  Red  River  is  tlie  syjihon,  and  Minnesota 
is  the  reservoir  that  its  wealth  will  always  flow 
into.  Blinnesota,  too,  gentlemen,  as  my  friend 
Lieutenant  JIaury  says,  is  the  centre  of  the 
Northern  thermal  band — the  temperate  zone,  the 
zone  of  commerce,  nu^nufactures,  industrial  ac- 
tivity, and  the  wealth  and  power  of  the  globe. 
England,  France,  Russia,  Germany,  the  New 
England,  Middle,  and  Northwestern  States  lie 
in  it ;  the  whole  valley  of  the  St.  Lawrence  and 
the  great  basin  of  the  Saskatchewan  lie  in  it. 
The  climatic  associations  of  this  belt,  upon  the 
eastern  side  of  the  basin  of  the  great  lakes,  have 
formed  the  elements  of  the  popular  delusions  re- 
garding the  climate  of  the  region  to  the  west  and 
northwest  of  us.  But  how  absurd  is  the  deduc- 
tion !  The  same  argument  proves  that  the  vine- 
clad  hills  of  France  are  no  better  than  the  banks 
of  Newfoundland,  and  Central  Europe  as  bleak 
and  cold  as  our  stormy  Labrador.  Science  and 
observation  tell  us  that  the  western  coasts  of 
continents  are  warmer  than  the  eastern  in  the 
I  same  latitude,  and  the  northwestern  areas  of  our 
continent  will  yet  be  settled  with  a  poindation 
such  as  it  deserves." 
The  orator,  dismounting  from  his  throne,  was 
saluted  with  three  cheers.     The  wit  of  the  i)arty 
called  for  "  Hail  Columbia"  from  the  thermal 
band,  and  the  twenty  mounted  their  horses  and 
carts  and  drove  on. 
The  day's  jjrogramme  soon  settled  down  into 
this  routine :  The  morning  watch  called  the 
cooks  of  the  three  messes  at  sunrise,  and  the 
cooks  called  tlicir  messes  half  an  hour  later. 
After  ablutions,  which  were  performed  in  proxi- 
mate tin  basins  or  distant  brooks,  breakfost  wa,- 
laid  upon  the  gronnd  and  eaten.  The  interval, 
till  seven  or  eight  o'clock,  was  generally  given  to 
miscellaneous  matters,  hm-ses  needing  to  be  shod, 
liarness  to  be  mended,  tents  to  be  struck,  jour- 
nals to  be  written  up,  etc.  At  half  past  seven 
the  animals  which  had  been  nnpieketed  at  sun- 
rise by  the  morning  watch  were  brought  up, 
harnessed  and  saddled,  and  at  about  eight  tlie 
expedition  started  on  its  day's  journey.  We 
rested  an  hour  or  half-hour  at  noon,  and  went 
into  camp  at  four.  The  variations  upon  this 
])lan  became  numerous  as  we  journeyed  on. 
Sometimes  a  deep  stream  was  to  be  crossed, 
wliich  cccu]]ied  half  the  day,  during  which  the 
horses  rested,  and  could,  therefore,  travel  later. 
Sometimes  the  greater  part  of  a  day's  journey 
was  through  marshes,  or  the  road  was  bad  and 
full  of  sloughs,  which  wearied  the  horses :  in  this 
case  we  went  into  cam])  earlier.  But  the  prin-  j 
ci]>al  cause  of  variation  came  to  be  the  nearness 
of  wood  and  water.  These  words  gi-adnally 
changed  their  original  signification  into  a  much 
broader  one,  in  our  minds.  Wood  once  meant 
the  stuft'  floors  and  doors  and  desks  are  made 
of,  and  water  was  merely  one  of  a  great  variety 
of  fluids.  Now  wood  and  water  became  essen- 
tials to  us.     We  must  have  them  or  go  supper- 
OrK  MATTEALIST  BTUDTING   GBAS8E8 
MY  FIEST  WATcn. 
less  to  bed,  and  start  breakfastless  in  the  morn- 
ing.    They  stood  instead  of  a  hundred  thing, 
and  were,  to  use  the  phrase  of  a  philosopher; 
the  fundamental  data  of  life.     By  them  we  lired 
and  moved,  and  had  our  being. 
On  coming  to  the  camp-ground  the  horses 
were  at  once  unsaddled  and  the  mules  unhar- 
nessed  all  watered  and  turned  out  to  graze  till 
twLbght,  when  they  were  picketed  for  the  night 
I  he  tents  were  pitched,  wood  cut,  and  water 
brought  for  the  cooks,  who  set  forth  their  tins 
built  the  fires,  and  proceeded  to  business.  After 
supper  the  watch,  who  was  on  duty  from  sunset 
tiU  midnight,  built  smudges  for  the  animals,  saw 
they  were  properly  picketed,  and  began  his  round. 
The  blankets  were  spread  in  the  tents,  the  tents 
smudged  or  mosquito  nets  hung,  and  at  dark 
nearly  all  were  asleep.  A  few  lingered  around 
the  camp-fire  telling  stories  of  home,  singing 
songs  and  choruses,  and  smoking  their  pipes  ■ 
but  soon  they,  too,  joined  the  sleepers. 
My  first  watch  happened  to  fall  while  we  were 
camped  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Mssissippi.  It 
was  the  morning  watch,  from  midnight  to  sun- 
rise. A  cool  wind,  inexpressibly  refreshing  after 
the  heat  of  the  day,  blew  the  blanket  from  mv 
shoulders  as  I  stepped  out  of  the  tent  at  the  call  of 
the  first  watch.  Over  the  whole  sky  clouds  v,ere 
flying  to  the  south,  in  thick  billows;  through  the 
upper  air,  and  in  whiter  flecks  of  foam  below 
In  the  west  tlie  full  moon  was  going  down,  now 
completely  liiddcn  from  the  sight,  and  now  burst- 
ing through  the  rifts  wiih  a  sudden  light.  In 
these  moments  the  white  tents  gleamed,  and  the 
thick  darkness  which  hung  over  the  river,  the 
forests  of  trees  upon  its  western  bank,  and  upon 
the  islands  between,  suddenly  passed  awav,  re- 
vealing their  sharp  outline  against  the  sky,  the 
rounded  grnccful  masses  of  foliage,  broken  by 
here  and  there  a  giant  trunk  leafless,  the  memo- 
rial of  some  storm  and  its  swift  lightning  stroke. 
Long,  deep  shadows  stretched  across  the  river  al- 
most to  the  liither  shore,  and  where  the  moon- 
light shone  fair  and  clear,  the  rajiid  current  of 
the  river,  whose  waters  the  nortli  wind  seemed 
hurrj-ing  on  to  their  southern  gulf,  was  trans- 
formed to  bridges  of  light,  and  the  illusion  hard- 
ly passed  away  until  a  raft  came  floating  down 
the  stream  out  of  the  darkness,  a  single  form 
visible  upon  its  TiTinkled  surfirce,  his  hand  upon 
the  huge  paddle  guiding  its  course  through  the 
windings  of  the  channel  as  it  swayed  from  shore 
to  shore. 
St.  Clond,  seventy-fivtfmiles  north  of  St.  Paul, 
the  northern  limit  of  the  second  stretch  of  con- 
tinuous navigation  on  the  Mississijjpi,  was  our 
first  station.  Six  or  seven  years  ago  there  was 
nothing  there  but  the  forest  primeval  and  a 
cabin  or  two:  Now  there  is  a  capital  hotel,  the 
Stearns  House,  two  or  three  churches,  a  hospital 
of  the  Sisters  of  Jlercy,  and  houses  for  a  thou- 
sand people.  The  west  bluff  of  the  river,  where 
St.  Cloud  stands,  is  high  and  steep,  the  prairie 
stretching  back  of  it  level.  From  various  [joints 
on  this  bluff  the  river  views  are  beautiful,  espe- 
cially the  one  looking  north  to  Sauk  Rapids,  two 
or  three  miles  above. 
The  greatest  institution,  the  peculiar  one  of 
St.  Cloud,  I  have  failed  to  mention — the  St. 
Cloud  newspaper.  Joseph  and  I  called  upon  its 
editor,  the  well-known  Mrs.  Swisshelm,  and  were 
permitted  to  see  the  most  northwestern  printing 
oflice  of  the  cis-montane  States.  We  found  the  re- 
puted ogre  a  large-eyed,  lively  little  woman,  with 
a  masculine  and  iraliandsome  breadth  and  height 
of  forehead,  wearing  a  ])lain  brown  Quakerish 
dress,  and  occupied  in  sewing  together  a  carpet 
for  the  principal  room  in  her  new  house,  just 
finishing  and  adjoining  the  old  one.  She  was 
very  busy,  and  therefore  kept  her  position  on  the 
floor  and  went  on  with  her  work,  telling  us,  how- 
ever, that  she  was  glad  we  came,  begging  us  to 
go  on  and  talk,  but  launching  her  bark  in  the 
current  of  conversation  before  we  had  knocked 
away  the  shores  of  otir  own.  She  was  absorbent 
and  capacious  of  information,  uniting  the  pro- 
fessional inquisitiveness  of  the  reporter  with  the 
friendly  curiosity  of  her  sex.  Her  comments 
were  shrewd  and  her  talk  often  witty.  Present- 
ly she  left  her  work  and  took  us  into  the  print- 
ing-oflice  and  sanctum.  The  latter  was  a  small 
apartment  partitioned  off  from  the  main  room, 
long  and  narrow.  In  one  comer  stood  the  edi- 
torial desk,  with  a  pile  of  exchanges  surmounted 
by  the  professional  scissors  and  paste-pot.  She 
liad  been  comiiellcd  to  use  the  saiictum  as  a  liv- 
ing room  also.  At  the  right  stood  a  table  with 
the  dishes  laid  for  tea,  and  close  at  the  left  a 
cooking  stove  loaded  with  tea-pot,  frying-pan. 
and  kettles.  Every  thing  appeared  in  confusion 
in  this  sanctum  ;  for  it  was  not  large  enough  te 
swing  a  cat  comfortably  in,  and  yet  was  crowded 
with  the  miscellaneous  contents  of  an  editorial 
office,  a  kitchen,  and  dining-room,  and  served, 
besides,  as  the  passage-way  to  the  larger  roon? 
beyond.  In  this  room  were  the  hand-]iress  and 
stands  of  type,  one  or  two  half-madc-up  fonns 
and  half  a  dozen  galleys  rested  on  the  table, 
while  the  walls  were  adorned  with  ])osters  an- 
nouncing horse  sales,  houses  to  rent,  etc.  A 
window  was  broken,  and  the  floorlittered.  Lean- 
ing against  the  form-table  in  this  dingy  room, 
the  brave  woman  told  us  how  she  had  learned  to 
set  type  herself,  and  then  taught  boys  to ;  how  she 
made  up  the  forms  ;  how  she  had  got  along  with 
a  stiff-necked  and  rebellious  people ;  how  she  had 
enjoyed  her  persecutions  and  mild  martyrdom  : 
how  she  had  endured  the  res  anrjitsla  doiiii,  and. 
like  all  the  rest  of  us  workies,  had  nearly  died  in 
getting  a  living. 
We  had  a  supper  that  night— not  bnt  what,  in 
the  ordinary  conditions  of  the  exchequer,  most 
of  us  were  sure  of  three  meals  a  day ;  but  thif 
was  a  particular  and  public   supper.     For  mi 
part,  I  remember  nothing  of  it  except  that  the 
presiding   officer   was  C.  C.   Andrews,  immor- 
talized  in   "  The  Red  River  Trail,"   a  lawyer 
who  is  making  his  mark  in  the  northwest,  and 
;  that,  after  his  sensible  brief  speech,  somebody  pot 
j  up  and  told  who  built  the  first  wagon  in  Jlinne- 
sota,  and  somebody  else  expressed  the  opinion 
that  the  head  of  navigation  on  the  Mississippi 
I  was   not   St.    Paul,   nor  S'n'anthony,   nor   St. 
Cloud,  but  Fort  Edmonton  on  the  Saskatche- 
wan. 
On  Jlonday,  June  20,  the  ti-ain  stnick  its  fcnt~ 
and  left  St.  Cloud :  here  beginning  its  experienccf 
of  camp-life  with  a  back-ground.  So  fiir  we  had 
been  treading  the  w.arp  and  woof  of  civilization— 
now  we  began  to  slip  off  the  fringes  of  its  outer- 
most skirts.  Our  direction  was  northwest,  by  the 
valley  of  Sauk  River,  through  the  lake  district  of 
Middle  Minnesota  to  the  head  of  navigation  on 
Red  River.  Such  articles  as  were  needed  had 
been  added  to  our  outfit,  including  a  boat  to  crns^ 
streams  in,  which  served  for  a  wagon  box  on  dry 
land.  The  second  day  out  all  our  horses  anil 
mules  ran  away  before  breakf^ist.  Half  the  cam] 
scoured  the  country  in  every  direction  in  search  foi 
the  runaways.  They  were  caught  four  miles  awav. 
making  steady  tracks  for  St.  Cloud  and  its  pos- 
sible oats,  led  on  in  their  desertion  by  two  of  the 
handsomest,  smallest,  and  meekest-looking  mules 
in  the  train.  The  road  rewarded  them  with  re- 
tributive justice  that  day.  The  sloughs  were  in- 
numerable, and  indeed  innumerable  they  con-  . 
tinned  to  he  for  weeks  and  weeks,  only  ajjproach- 
ing  the  limits  of  mathematical  calculation  as  w. 
neared  Pembina.  This  may  seem  strange  when 
it  is  considered  that  we  crossed  the  divide  be- 
tween the  tributaries  of  the  Minnesota  and  Mis. 
sissippi;  but,   as  Joseph  said,  "with  a  general 
GETTING   OUT  OF   A   SLODGH. 
convexity  of  outline  there  was  grofit  coneaWty 
of  detail."  The  convex  "  divide,"  like  a  rounded 
cheek,  had  a  small-pox  of  lakes,  bogs,  ponds, 
sloughs,  and  morasses. 
To  give  in  detail  the  particulars  of  this  part 
of  our  experience  would  be  cruel  to  writer  and 
reader,  though  it  might  gain  the  former  a  seat 
in  the  Chinese  Paradise  of  Fuh,  where  the  purg- 
atorial price  of  admission  is  to  wade  for  seven 
years  in  mud  up  to  the  chin.  So  let  me  give 
the  spirit  of  it  all,  in  a  lump. 
The  only  external  indication  of  some  kinds 
of  sloughs  is  a  ranker  growth  of  grass,  perhaps 
of  a  dilYerent  color,  in  the  low  groimd  between 
two  hills  of  a  rolling  prairie.  Again,  on  a  level 
prairie,  where  the  road  seems  the  same  as  that 
you  have  been  traveling  dry  shod,  your  horse's 
hoofs  splash  in  wet  gi-ass.  This  goes  on,  worse 
and  worse,  till  you  get  nervous  and  begin  to  draw 
up  your  heels  out  of  the  water ;  and  so,  jierhaps, 
for  a  mile,  whether  in  the  water  or  out  of  it  you 
can  not  tell,  horses  up  to  their  bellies  tnulgiug 
through  the  water  and  grass,  carts  sinking  deep- 
er than  the  hubs,  you  travel  at  the  rate  of  one 
mile  in  2.40.  Very  often,  however,  sloughs 
put  on  no  such  plausible  appearance,  but  confess 
themselves  at  once  immistakably  bad  and  ruin- 
ous to  horses  and  carts. 
It  is  the  wagon-master's  business  to  ride  ahead 
of  the  train  a  few  hundred  yards,  and,  on  coming 
to  a  slough,  to  force  bis  horse  carefully  back  and 
forth  through  it  till  he  finds  the  best  place  for 
crossing.  I  have  fished  for  trout  in  Berkshire 
streams  so  small  that,  to  an  observer  a  hundred 
yards  distant,  I  must  have  seemed  to  be  bobbing 
for  grasshoppers  in  a  green  meadow ;  but  the  ap- 
pearance is  not  more  novel  than  to  see  a  strong 
horse  plunging  and  pitching  in  a  sea  of  green 
grass  that  seems  to  have  as  solid  a  foundation  as 
that  yonr  own  hoi-se's  hoofs  are  printing.  Some 
sloughs  Iiave  no  better  or  worse  spot.  It  is  mud 
from  one  side  to  the  other — mud  bottomless  and 
infinite,  and  backing  up  in  someinfernal  Symmes's 
hole.  The  foremost  cart  approaches,  and,  at  the 
first  step,  the  mule  sinks  to  his  knees.  Some 
mules  lie  domi  at  this  point ;  but  most  of  ours 
were  sufficiently  well  broken  to  make  one  more 
spasmodic  leap,  and,  tliough  the  water  or  mud 
went  no  higher  than  their  fetlocks,  then  and 
there  they  laid  them  do\^Ti.  This  is  the  moment 
for  human  intervention,  and,  on  the  part  of  pro- 
fane mule-drivers,  for  an  imprecation  of  divine 
intervention.  The  men  get  off  their  horses  and 
carts,  and  hurry  to  the  shafts  and  wheels,  tugging 
and  straining,  while  one  or  two  yell  at  and  bela- 
bor the  discouraged  and  mulish  mnle. 
The  census  man  w'ould  have  no  difficulty  at 
this  juncture  in  ascertaining  the  persuasion  to 
which  ])rofane  mule-drivers  belong,  or,  at  least, 
in  which  they  have  been  reared.  Some  of  their 
oaths  derive  their  flavor  from  camp-meeting  rem- 
iniscences. Another  man  excels  as  a  close-com- 
munion swearer,  and,  after  damning  his  mule, 
superfluously  danms  the  man  who  would  not 
damn  him.  Other  oaths  have  a  tropical  luxu- 
riance of  iiTcverent  verbiage  that  shows  them  to 
have  been  drawn  from  the  grand  and  reverent 
phrases  of  the  Prayer-book,  and  still  others  are 
of  that  sort  which  proves  their  users  godless 
^vretches,  with  whom,  for  very  ignorance,  oaths 
stand  in  the  stead  of  adjectives. 
Belabored  by  oaths,  kicks,  whip-lashes,  and 
ropes-ends,  the  mule  may  rise  and  plunge  and 
lie  down,  and  rise  again  and  plunge,  until  the 
cart  is  on  solid  ground ;  but  it  was  generally  the 
quicker  way  to  unload  the  cart  or  wagon  at  once, 
or  to  lighten  it  until  the  mule  could  get  through 
easily.  If  this  was  inconvenient  for  any  reason, 
a  rope  was  fastened  to  the  axle,  and  twenty  men 
pulling  one  way  would  generally  succeed  in  beat- 
ing the  planet  pulling  the  other.  Our  Indian 
ponies  got  through  mud  splendidly.  Joseph 
was  heard  to  recommend  a  stud  of  them  for  the 
hither  side  of  Banyan's  Slough  of  Despond. 
They  were  too  lazy  to  be  other  tlian  deliberate 
in  getting  out  of  a  hole.  They  put  their  feet 
down  carefully,  and,  like  oxen,  waddled  along, 
one  step  or  one  jump  at  a  time.  So  they  never 
strained  themselves  asaliigh-spirited  horse  would, 
and  yet  were  not  so  mulish  as  to  be  willing  to 
stay  stuck  in  the  mud  for  centuries,  imtil  the 
branches  of  future  trees  should  lift  them  up  for 
fruit  like  Sir  John  Mandeville's  sheep. 
Three  times  we  crossed  tlie  tortuous  Sauk, 
first  by  a  ferry  like  the  one  at  Rum  Kiver.  The 
next  time,  four  days  aftenvard,  we  had  to  make 
our  own  ferry.  One  stout  fellow  swam  across 
vrith.  a  rope  in  his  teeth,  which  was  tied  firmly 
to  stout  trees  opposite  each  other.  Then  the 
wagon  box  was  taken  off  the  wheels,  two  or  three 
honrs  spent  in  calking  it,  launched,  and  a  man 
in  the  bow,  holding  on  to  the  rope  which  sagged 
down  to  within  a  yard  of  the  water,  by  bending 
his  body  and  keeping  stiff  legs,  could  head  the 
bow  up  stream  against  the  swift  current,  and  pull 
himself  and  the  load  across.  A  Cree  half-breed 
did  this  canoeing  as  dexterously  from  the  first  as 
if  he  had  spent  his  life  on  the  river.  Horses, 
mules,  and  oxen  were  then  pushed  into  the 
stream,  one  by  one,  their  lariats  tied  around 
their  noses,  and  held  by  another  person  in  the 
boat,  so  as  to  guide  them  at  once  to  the  ouly 
place  where  they  could  get  ashore.  Finally,  the 
empty  carts  and  wagons  were  floated  across,  and 
pulled  up  the  bank  by  a  rope  around  the  axle. 
Crossing  other  streams  where  the  current  was 
not  swift  enough  to  overturn  the  carts,  and  the 
water  only  deep  enough  to  flow  over  the  boxes, 
we  cut  saplings,  made  a  floor  on  top  of  the  frames, 
Uftcd  the  goods  top  of  that,  and  crossed  without 
unharnessing  a  mule. 
OLAIAI-STAKE. 
claim-bhantt. 
The  conclusion 
of  all  which  is,  that 
people  on  railroad 
cars  don't  realize 
what  they  have  to 
be  thankful  for. 
This  valley  of  the 
Sauk  up  which  we 
were  traveling  is 
one  of  the  garden 
spots  of  Minnesota. 
The  new  settlers  of 
tile  last  two  or  three 
years  have  many  of 
them  taken  that 
direction.  Claim- 
stakes  and  claim- 
shanties  speck  the 
road  from  one  end 
of  the  river  to  the 
other.  Some  of  the 
claim-shanties"  were  built  in  good  faith,  had 
been  lived  in,  and  land  was  tilled  around  them. 
Not  a  few,  however,  were  of  the  other  sort,  built 
to  keep  the  letter  of  the  law  ;  four  walls  merely, 
no  windows,  door,  or  roof.  We  often  foimd  it 
convenient  to  camp  near  these  edifices,  and  saved 
ourselves  the  trouble  of  going  half  a  mile  for 
wood  when  we  found  it  cut  so  near  at  hand. 
A  terrific  thunder-storm  came  on  one  after- 
noon in  this  Sauk  valley  to  which  the  average 
thunder-storms  of  lat.  40°  42'  long.  74°  41'  are 
two-penny  and  theatrical.  We  were  drenched, 
of  course,  with  the  lowest  cloudful,  in  a  moment ; 
but  the  thunder  was  so  near,  prolonged,  and 
hurtling,  that  it  was  enough  to  make  a  brave 
man  sliiver  to  remember  that  his  trowsers  had  a 
steel  buckle.  All  day  and  all  night  the  tempest 
continued,  rain  pouring,  lightning  flashing  ronnd 
the  whole  circuit  of  the  heavens,  and  the  thun- 
der unintermitted.  But  the  next  morning  rose 
as  clear-skied  as  if  the  preceding  had  been  a 
June  day  of  old  tradition,  and  not  written  down 
iu  the  calendar  of  the  battle-mouth  as  the  anni- 
versary of  Montebello. 
Our  last  day's  travel  in  syl- 
^  van  Sauk  Valley  took  us  to  Osak- 
^^  is  Lake.     Here  we  camped  for 
Sunday,  in  an  opening  in  a  fine 
forest  which  surrounded  the  lake. 
Sund.ay  was  a  perfect  day.  With 
patient  sight  one  might  trace  here 
and  there  the  graceful  scarf-like 
shadowy  white  of  the  highest  and 
rarest  clouds  against  the  pure 
blue.  No  lower  or  coarser  forms 
were  visible  any  where  from  hori- 
zon to  horizon,  and  even  these 
would  sweep  into  such  evanes- 
cent folds,  and  ripjile  away  into 
such  ethereal  faincness,  that  the 
eye  passed  them  and  looked 
through  the  blue  ether  itself.  To 
breathe  the  pure  air  was  indeed 
an  inspiration.  The  wind  came 
fresh   and   clear  over    the  lake. 
I 
There  it  lies,  surronnded  by  forests  on  every 
side,  -nith  only  here  and  there  vistas  of  open 
prairie.  From  the  level  of  the  roots  of  tlie 
nearest  trees,  and  from  tlie  shadows  tliat  rest 
among  their  huge  trunks,  the  shining  beach 
slopes  down,  its  white  sand  tlie  floor  where  the 
waves  endlessly  run  up,  visible  far  out  and  then 
fused  with  the  surface  blue.  I  gave  myself  a 
baptism  in  this  beautiful  cold  lake,  and  then 
finding  an  old  gnarled  oak  whose  spreading 
limbs  made  a  comfortable  couch  overlooking 
the  water,  whiled  the  still  hours  away  till  the 
shadows  of  the  distant  trees  lengthened  over  the 
lake  and  touched  the  hither  shore. 
Osakis  Lake  is  twelve  miles  long  and  two  or 
three  wide ;  its  waters  are  quite  cold,  and  abound 
with  the  largest  and  finest  kind  of  fresh-water 
fish— wa!l-eved  pike,  bass,  perch,  and  other.  The 
Doctor,  our  one  skillful  fisherman,  brought  in  a 
boat-load,  eaught  in  an  hour  or  two's  drifting. 
The  rest  otThe  camp  spent  the  day  in  reading, 
writing,  sewing,  fishing,  washing,  cooking,  and 
mending  wagons. 
Ten  or  twelve  miles  over  the  very  worst  road 
yet,  brought  us  to  a  place  which,  when  it  gets 
to  be  a  place,  is  to  be  called  Alexandria.    Half 
of  the  distance  and  more  was  through  woods. 
Look  up,  and  there  was  gorgeous  sunlight  flood- 
ing the  fresh  young  leaves,  lighting  up  old  oak 
trunks,  and  glorifjnng  the  brilliant  Ijirch  and  ma- 
ple, pigeons  flying  or  alit,  robins  and  thrushes, 
and  what  other  mellow-throated  songsters  I  know- 
not,  making  the  vistas  and  aisles  of  shadow  alive 
with  sound ;  but  look  down,  and  your  horse  was 
balking  at  a  labyrinth  of  stumps,  where  there 
was  no  place  to  put  his  foot :  this  extending  for 
ten  rods,  and  there  terminating  in  a  slough  ag- 
gravated by  the  floating  de^ris  of  a  corduroy 
bridge,  and  this  ending  in  a  mud.hole,  the  black- 
ness of  darkness,  with  one  stump  upright  to  ' 
prevent  your  wading  comfortably  through  it,  to 
transfix  your  horse  or  upset  the  cart. 
The  carts  and  their  drivers  could  not  get 
through  by  daylight,  but  were  compelled  to  stay 
in  the  woods  and  fight  mosquitoes  all  night, 
reaching  Alexandria  about  noon  the  next  day. 
Joseph  and  I,  on  our  ponies,  "  thridded  the  som- 
bre boskage  of  tlie  wood,"  and  got  to  Alexandria 
before  dark.  It  was  slow  traveling,  but,  on  sure- 
footed Indian  ponies,  not  very  disagreeable.  Tho 
mosquitoes  were  our  worst  torment ;  we  avoided 
their  terebrations  by  "  taking  the  vail." 
^'  -''^'    ^^Z 
TAKING   TW7.  VArT- 
MAJOR    PATTEN'S   CEOSSINQ. 
About  the  middle  of  the  afternoon  we  caught 
glimpses  through  the  leaves  of  a  lake  at  the  riglit 
of  us,  and  soon  came  to  the  short  branch  road 
which  led  to  it.  Leading  our  horses  down  to 
the  water's  edge,  we  observed  a  blazed  tree  just 
at  the  margin,  and  an  inscription  neatly  writ- 
ten on  the  white  wood,  with  date  and  name  of 
tlie  company  hj  whom  it  Iiad  been  cut. 
Coming  out  on  the  beautiful  prairie  which  is 
the  site  of  Alexandria,  we  were  surprised  to  see 
tlie  wagons  and  tents  of  IVIessrs.  Burbank  and 
Blakely's  first  two  stage  loads,  showing  that  tlieir 
road-makers  were  not  far  enough  ahead  for  them 
to  follow  on.  Is  it  possible  that  I  have  forgot- 
ten to  tell  the  romance  of  that  stage  load  ?  Two 
Scotch  girls,  sisters,  journeying  without  any  pro- 
tector save  their  good  looks  and  good  sense, 
from  Scotland  to  Lake  Athabasca,  where  one  of 
them  was  to  redeem  her  plighted  faith  and  marry 
a  Hudson  Bay  Company's  officer.  Ocean  voyage 
alone,  two  or  three  thousand  miles'  travel  through 
.a  strange  country  to  St.  Paul  alone,  then  this 
journey  by  stage  to  Fort  Abercrombie,  camping 
out  and  cooking  their  own  food,  and  voyaging 
down  Eed  River  in  a  batteau,  near  a  thousand 
miles  more,  and  fired  at  by  Red  Lake  Indians 
on  the  way,  then  journeying  with  a  Company's 
brigade  to  Athabasca,  going  north  all  the  while 
and  winter  coming  on  too,  and  the  mercury 
traveling  down  to  the  bulb;  but  her  courage 
sinking  never  a  bit.  Hold  her  fast  when  you 
get  her,  Athabascan!  She  is  a  heroine,  and 
slioiild  be  the  mother  of  heroes. 
And  the  brave  bridesmaid  sister  !  Wliere  are 
"the  chivalry?"  Letters  take  about  a  year  to 
get  to  Athabasca,  gentlemen. 
Three  English  sjjortsmen  and  their  guns,  tents, 
and  dogs  filled  another  stage.  They  had  iiunted 
in  Canada  and  Floi-ida,  shot  crocodiles  in  the 
valley  of  the  Nile,  fished  for  salmon  in  Norway, 
and  were  now  on  their  way  to  the  buitalo-plains 
of  the  Saskatchewan  to  enjoy  the  finest  sport  of 
all.  Purdy  rifles,  Lancaster  rifles,  Wesley  Rich- 
ards's  shot-guns,  and  Manton's  shot-guns,  sin- 
gle-barreled and  double-barreled :  these  were 
their  odds  against  brute  strength  and  cunning. 
One  of  tiiem  was  a  baronet,  the  others  Oxford 
men,  and  all  might  have  passed  a  life  of  ease  in 
London  with  society,  libraries,  establishments  ; 
but  this  wild  life,  with  .all  its  discomforts  and 
privations  and  actual  hardships  and  hard  work, 
had  more  attractions  for  them  in  its  freedom^ 
its  romance,  its  adventure.  Their  stories  were 
of  beleaguered  proctors  and  bear  fights.  Hyde 
Park  and  deer-stalking,  Eotten  Row  rides  and 
moose  hunts.  Next  year  we  may  hear  of  them 
up  the  Orinoco  or  in  South  Africa.  Better  there 
than  wasting  away  manliness  in  "society,"  or 
tlie  "  hells,"  or  in  bribing  electors ;  but  is  there 
not  soraetliing  else  in  all  England  worth  living 
and  working  for  ? 
One  of  the  three  was  a  splendid  rifle-shot. 
With  my  Maynard  rifle,  breach-loading  and 
weighing  only  six  pounds,  unlike  any  thing  he 
had  ever  handled,  he  plumped  a  sai-diue-bo.x  at 
distances  of  100,  150,  200,  and  300  yards,  and 
hit  the  small  tree,  in  a  cleft  of  which  it  was 
fastened,  almost  every  time  in  twenty. 
Our  tented  field  was  a  fair  beginning  for  a 
town.  In  fact,  we  far  outnumbered  the  actual 
population  of  Alexandria.  Josejjh  and  I  were 
glad  enough  to  be  permitted  to  enjoy  more  than 
municipal  privileges   under  the  roof  of  Judge 
^ •     If  pioneers  were  all  of  the  kind  that 
have  founded  Alexandria,  civilization  and  re- 
finement would  travel  west  as  fast  as  settlements, 
instead  of  being  about  a  decade  behind.  The 
house  was  built  of  hewn  logs,  of  course  ;  but  in- 
side grace  and  beauty  struggled  with  the  rough- 
ness of  such  raw  materials  and  came  off  victori- 
ous, and  yet  nothing  was  out  of  place.  There 
was  an  air  about  the  main  room  that  made  you 
remember  that  the  grandest  queen  walked  on 
rush-strewn  floors  not  half  so  fine  as  these  spot- 
less planks— and  what  wall-paper  had  such  deli- 
cate hues  as  the  pealed  bark  revealed  on  tiie 
timber  beneath  ?— and  there  was  a  woman's  trick 
in  the  fill  of  the  window-curtains  and  the  hang- 
ing of  the  net  over  the  spotless  counterpane  in 
tlie  corner,  and  the  disposition  of  things  on  the 
bureau,  crowned  by  its  vaseful  of  beautiful 
prairie  flowers.  Here  we  enjoyed  such  dinner- 
table  chat  and  such  long  evening  talks,  W.  and 
I,  witli  .Judge  G and  his  wife,  as  made  us 
wish  we  had  known  them  in  London  Terrace  ten 
years  ago,  though  we  could  regret  the  absence 
of  none  of  the  luxuries  which  they  were  dailv 
proving  a  well-ordered  life  could  be  lived  without. 
Alexandria  is  environed  by  beautiful  lakes- 
lakes  which  I  obstinately  refuse  to  rhapsodize 
over,  simply  because  they  are  so  many  and  all 
deseiTe  it.     To  a  promontory  jutting  out  into 
one  of  these  I  took  a  seven-mile  walk  early  one 
drizzly  morning,  with  one  of  our  party,  accom- 
panied by  a  hound,  for  which  he  had  returned  to 
follow  up  the  scent  of  a  deer  which  he  said  he 
had  shot  and  wounded  badly  two  hours  before 
We  found  the  place— the  leaves  were  splashed 
with  blood— gave  the  dog  the  scent,  and  followed 
his  wild  running  for  two  or  three  miles,  but  saw 
no  deer,  and  walked  home  in  the  rain.     Now 
there  are  three  hypotheses,  together  exhaustive, 
which  may  explain  this  unfortunate  occurrence. 
Either  the  deer  was  not  badly  wounded,  and  went 
further  on,  "making  no  sign,"  or  the  dog  was 
not  a  good  dog,  or,  if  a  good  dog,  had  had  his 
nose  spoiled  in  killing  skunks,  which  is  possible. 
I  never  will  believe  that  a  chipmonk  has  as  much 
blood  in  his  veins  as  was  scattered  over  those 
leaves,  or  that  any  sane  man  could  mistake  a 
squirrel  for  a  deer. 
First  day's  travel  from  Alexandria  train  made 
2i  miles.  Best  four-wheel  wagon  had  all  its 
spokes  onished  out  falling  into  some  rut  in  a 
wood-road.  Next  day  we  got  on  a  dozen  miles 
farther  to  Chippewa  crossing.  A  jjarty  of  fifty 
Cliiijpewas  were  hunting  and  fishing  in  the 
vicinity.  Two  dusky  boys  watched  us  erossltig 
from  their  canoe  and  laughed,  I  fancy,  at  white 
paddling.  A  sliower  came  up,  but  before  the 
shallow  lake  had  put  on  its  goose-flesh  to  meet 
the  rain-drops,  their  paddles  were  out,  and  thev 
"now  I  LAY  UE— ' 
skimming  the  water,  straight  as   a  crow  flies, 
fhrough  the  rushes  to  the  shelter  of  trees  whicli 
overhung  the  water,  and  there  the  canoe  rested 
motionless  again,  and  they  watched  us  in  silence. 
They  had  speared  half  a  dozen  buftalo-fish  (of  a 
i „  ^.w^^u  «i.jii*iw-iiou  ^^ui  a 
■ather  coarse  meat),  and  a  jjlug  of  tobacco  bought 
all  we  wanted  for  supper. 
I  beg  to  be  excused  from  mentioning  the  fact 
that,  at  this  crossing,  my  pony  in  fonr-feet  water, 
and  with  only  two  rods  to  dry  land,  disgracefully 
neighed  a 
^^Now  I  lay  me — " 
and  squatted,  yes !  squatted  down  in  the  water, 
positively  refusing  to  obey  whip  or  spur  till  I 
had  got  ot(  his  back  and  walked  to  dry  land, 
leading  him.  It  is  also  needless  to  mention  that 
my  saddle,  saddle-bags,  Sliakspearc,  and  sketch- 
book, together  with  all  of  me  that  is  fishy  in 
mermen,  became,  to  use  a  mild  term,  damp. 
The  prairie  from  Alexandria  to  Otter  Tail 
River  was  a  very  beautiful  one,  the  hills  moder- 
ately high  but  of  gentle  slopes,  their  green  grassy 
sides  flecked  with  wild  flowers  of  a  thousand  brill- 
iant or  quiet  hues,  and  then  eveiy  mile  or  two 
a  high  swell  of  land  from  which  we  could  look 
over  these  smaller  undulations  to  the  great  green 
wave  rising  to  its  height  again.  As  we  passed 
over  these  successive  heights,  about  noon  we 
caught  sight  in  tlie  distance  of  a  beautiful  lake, 
which,  on  approaching  nearer,  appeared  to  have 
a  line  of ' '  white  caps"  running  through  it.  Little 
wind  was  blowing,  but  the  illusion  was  perfect. 
As  we  approaclied  nearer,  however,  and  saw 
that  the  white  wave  remained  in  the  same  place, 
it  occuiTcd  to  us  that  we  were  looking  at  an  isl- 
and of  pelican  ;  and  this  became  evident  when 
we  saw  small  portions  of  it  disintegrating  about 
the  edges,  and  drifting  away  in  white  clouds,  re- 
lieved against  the  blue  sky  or  the  deeper  blue  of 
the  lake,  or  as  they  floated  past  the  tree-covered 
islands  and  promontories  which  pushed  their 
gray  sandy  beaches  out  into  the  water  from 
either  shore. 
I  have  never  seen  a  lake  which,  for  variety 
and  grace  of  outline,  apjieared  to  me  so  beauti- 
ful as  this,  though,  to  be  sure,  its  beauty  was 
far  from  being  of  a  striking  sort.  As  Joseph 
and  I  mounted  to  ride  on  after  the  train  we 
observed  a  large  flock  of  the  same  birds  circling 
high  in  air  overhead.  The  sight  was  worth  go- 
ing  far  to  see.  There  were  hundreds  of  them 
sweeping  around  in  slow  and  stately  flight— the 
distance  transforming  all  their  ungainliness  into 
grace,  and  the  bright  sunlight  clotliing  them  in 
white  splendor. 
To  the  right  and  left  of  us,  from  Osakis  Lake, 
the  head  of  tlie  Sauk  Valley,  to  Otter  Tail  or 
Upper  Red  River,  lakes  of  every  variety  of  out- 
line were  visible  as  we  journeyed  on.  Some 
were  near  at  hand— our  trail  at  times  leading 
over  their  sandy  or  pebbled  beaches,  or  upon 
others  we  looked  down  from  the  summit  of  a  hill 
of  rolling  prairie,  and  again  from  the  loftier 
ridges  of  the  undulating  land  sea,  tlie  eye,  sweep, 
ing  the  horizon,  could  trace  the  outlines  of  a 
dozen  within  the  limits  of  its  vision,  near  or  re- 
mote— bluer  than  the  stainless  heavens,  or  blend- 
ing in  the  hazy  distance  with  the  long  waving 
i^A 
JIEST  VIEW  OF  THE  EEB  RITEE  OF  THE  KOHTH. 
grass  which  sloped  to  the  water's  edge,  or  the 
black  and  brown  rushes  which,  like  timorous 
swimmers,  did  not  venture  far  from  shore,  or 
with  the  deeper  green  of  wooded  capes  and  isl- 
ands, which  caught  the  fierce  sunlight  and  shaded 
its  fall  upon  the  gentle  waters,  casting  themselves 
away  upon  the  beaches.  Joseph  rhapsodized 
and  I  applauded. 
"These  little  lakes  are  my  private  passion — 
deep-set,  dark-shadowed  lakes,  cozy  nooks  of 
sunshine  that  one  may  own  within  the  compass 
of  a  farm— pocket-editions  of  poetry  in  velvet  and 
gold— little  lakes  that,  from  under  their  wooded 
fringes,  gleam  with  an  under-soul,  and  flash  back 
the  introverted  glances  of  the  stars  from  depths 
as  pure  as  the  heights  of  the  down-gazing  heav- 
ens, such  a  lake  as  you  can  take  into  your  con- 
fidence, and  talk  to  in  quiet  hours  as  a  lover  talks 
to  the  image  in  a  golden  locket,  and  sees  the  cold 
crystal  all  aglow  and  shadowy  -nith  passion  like 
a  woman's  eye." 
It  was  our  habit  to  ride  ahead  of  the  train  a 
[  mile  or  two,  or  behind  it,  if  we  staid  to  hunt  or 
sketch  or  for  sight-seeing.     So  riding  the  next 
morning,  our  eyes  were  the  first  to  get  sight  of 
the  waters  which  run  to  the  frozen  seas  of  the 
north.     For  four  or  five  miles,  at  every  elevation, 
we  had  seen  ahead  of  us  a  line  of  timber,  and  be- 
yond level  prairie,  which  we  knew  must  be  the 
trees  skirting  the  Otter  Tail  or  Upper  Red  River, 
where,  a  young  and  wayward  stream,  it  flows  to 
the  south  and  west,  hither  and  thither,  before 
gaining  breadth  and  volume  and  gathering  trib- 
utary waters,  it  turns  to  its  final  direction,  and 
thenceforward  flows  with  steady  currents  toward 
the  northern  star.     The  prairie  within  this  bend, 
and  toward  which  we  were  traveling,  moreover, 
we  knew  to  be  level  instead  of  rolling  like  that 
to  the  east ;  so  on  we  spurred,  and,  surmounting 
a  summit,  on  the  hither  side  of  which  it  seemed 
that  the  nearest  curve  of  the  river  must  still  be 
miles  away,  there  the  river  ran  at  our  verv  feet, 
bursting  suddenly  upon  us  in  its  full  loveliness 
like  a  goddess  disrobing. 
The  day  was  the  fourth  of  the  month  July, 
and  this  was  our  unexpected  celebration  of  tlie 
Nation's  gala-day.  Taking  the  saddles  from  our 
horses,  and  leaving  them  to  their  independence, 
we  sat  down  upon  the  brow  of  a  high  hill  over- 
looking tlie  river  for  miles  of  its  wayward  wind- 
ings. Pen  and  penqjil  are  both  inadequate ;  but 
the  pencil  is  better  than  the  pen.  And  as  I 
sketched,  Joseph  made  the  oration. 
We  remained  here  for  the  rest  of  the  day. 
The  place  is  called  D.ayton,  after  a  gentlemjin 
who,  like  millions 'of  his  fellow-freemen,  was 
nol  elected  Vice-President.  The  present  pojm- 
lation  numbers  one.  They  live  alone  by  him- 
self in  a  breezy  log-house,  with  a  little  oft'-shoot 
containing  bunks  and  a  cooking-stove,  and  whose 
walls  are  hung  with  dried  sturgeons  and  cat- 
fishes,  caught  in  the  river. 
Breckinridge  is  about  twenty  miles  below  Day- 
ton,  in  a  southwest  direction,  and  is  situated  ]jre- 
cisely  at  the  point  where  the  river  begins  its  gen- 
eral northwardly  course,  at  the  junction  of  the 
Bois  de  Sioux.  Fort  Abercrombie  is  about  the 
same  distance  northwest  of  Breckinridge ;  so  that 
our  trail  toward  the  fort  from  Dayton  was  the 
liy])othenuse  of  the  river's  angle. 
When  the  gulfs  of  wood  that  marked  the 
course  of  Red  River  had  faded  into  dimness, 
and  sunk  below  the  horizon  behind  us,  nothing 
was  visible  but  the  sky  and  this  level  grass  stretch- 
ing away  in  every  direction.  There  were  lines 
of  lighter  and  deeper  shade  in  the  green  and  yel- 
low herbage,  flecks  of  brilliant  flowers,  cool  blue 
skies,  and  a  clearly  defined  horizon  at  the  east ; 
and  under  the  setting  sun  a  yellower  hue  in  the 
sky,  and  hazier  lines  upon  the  distant  and  waver- 
ing bands  of  shade  and  light  where  earth  and 
sky  met.  At  night  we  camped  beside  a  marsh ; 
and  when  the  last  red  streak  had  faded  out  of  the 
sky,  the  full  sublimity  of  the  scene  burst  upon 
the  mind.  A  night  upon  the  prairie  is  worth  a 
day  at  Niagara.     As  fiir  as  the  eye  can  reach  on 
hemisphere  of  stars  looks  down  upon  you,  and 
all  the  earth  occupying  the  least  possible  angle 
of  vision. 
Just  as  we  were  camping  for  the  night  a  com- 
pany of  Red  River  carts  appeared  upon  the  hori- 
zon.     At  first  we  could  hardly  imagine  what 
they  were — for  a  moment  widening  out  into  bat- 
talions, and  then  shrinking  to  the  width  of  a  sin- 
gle company,  as  the  trail  came  directly  toward 
or  was  at  right  angles  to  us,  so  that  it  seemed 
as  if  we  were  gazing  at  the  evolutions  of  a  grand 
army.     As  they  came  nearer  the  illusion  was 
dispelled,  and  the  train  began  to  look  like  what 
it  was — a  huge  land  caravan.    Presently  we  saw 
galloping  ahead  of  the  train^-  young  man,  well 
mounted,  who  in  a  few  moments  drew  rein  under 
the  Stars  and  Strijics.  which  we  had  patriotical- 
ly hoisted  when  we  first  saw  their  white  flag  of 
march  fluttering  in  the  distance.     The  rider,  a 
young  M'Kay,who  was  captain  of  the  train,  was 
well  mounted,  and  sat  his  horse  finely.       His 
clear,  bronzed  face  was  set  off  by  a  jaunty  cap. 
Ho  wore  a  checked  flannel  shirt,  and  each  shoul- 
der bore  its  fancy  wampum  bead  belt,  that  sus- 
l)ended  the  powder-horn  and  shot-jjouch.      He 
had  upon  his  feet  moccasins  worked  with  beads 
and  quills,  and  carried  in  his  hand  a  short-han- 
dled riding-whip,  with  a  long  thick  lash  of  buf- 
falo  hide.      Meanwhile,  as  we  exchanged  the 
news  and  friendly  questionings,  the  train  had 
approached,  one  cart  after  another  wheeling  by 
in  longprocession— scores  upon  scores,  each  wheel 
in  every  cart  having  its  own  individual  creak  or 
shriek,  and  each  cart  drawn  by  an  ox  harness- 
ed in  rawhide,  one  driver  to  three  carts.     The 
drivers  were  all  half-breeds,  dressed  in  every  va- 
riety of  costume,  but  nearly  all  showing  some 
flash  of  gaudy  color  in  the  invariable  belt  or 
sash,  or  in  the  moccasins,  and  politely  touching 
the  cap  with  a  "Bon  jour!"tosuch  of  usasstood 
near  enough  to  return  the  salutation. 
The  next  morning,  as  we  were  eating  break- 
every  side  sweep  the  level  lines,  slowly  darken- '  fast,  a  new  party  a^ieared,  which  soon  turned 
mg  as  they  approach  the  horizon.  Nothing  ob-  out  to  be  Sir  George  Simpson,  the  Governor  of 
structs  or  limits  the  view  of  the  sky.     A  whole  '  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  in  America    and 
FOUT  AOEBOSOMDIE, 
The  day  was  the  fourth  of  the  month  July, 
and  this  was  our  unexpected  celebration  of  the 
Nation's  gala-day.  Taking  the  saddles  from  our 
horses,  and  leaving  tlieni  to  their  independence, 
we  sat  down  upon  the  brow  of  a  high  hill  over- 
looking the  river  for  miles  of  its  wayward  wind- 
ings. Pen  and  pennjl  arc  botli  inadequate ;  but 
the  pencil  is  better  than  the  pen.  And  as  I 
sketched,  Joseph  made  the  oration. 
We  remained  here  for  the  rest  of  the  day. 
The  place  is  called  Dayton,  after  a  gentleman 
who,  like  millions 'of  his  fellow-freemen,  was 
not  elected  Vice-President.  The  present  pojju- 
lation  numbers  one.  They  live  alone  by  him- 
self in  a,  breezy  log-house,  with  a  little  off-shoot 
containing  bunks  and  a  cooking-stove,  and  whose 
walls  are  hung  with  dried  stm-geons  and  cat- 
fishes,  caught  in  the  river. 
Breckinridge  is  about  twenty  miles  below  Day- 
ton, in  a  southwest  direction,  and  is  situated  pre- 
cisely at  the  point  where  the  river  begins  its  gen- 
eral nortliwardly  course,  at  the  junction  of  the 
Bois  de  Sioux.  Fort  Abercrombie  is  about  the 
same  distance  northwest  of  Breckinridge ;  so  that 
our  trail  toward  the  fort  from  Dayton  was  the 
hypothenuse  of  the  river's  angle. 
When  the  gulfs  of  wood  that  marked  the 
course  of  Red  River  had  faded  into  dimness, 
and  sunk  below  the  horizon  behind  us,  nothing 
was  visible  but  the  sky  and  this  level  grass  stretch- 
ing away  in  every  direction.  There  were  lines 
of  lighter  and  deeper  shade  in  the  gi-een  and  yel- 
low lierbage,  flecks  of  brilliant  flowers,  cool  blue 
skies,  and  a  clearly  defined  horizon  at  the  east ; 
and  under  the  setting  sun  a  yellower  hue  in  the 
sky,  and  hazier  lines  upon  the  distant  and  waver- 
ing bands  of  shade  and  light  where  earth  and 
sky  met.  At  night  we  camped  beside  a  marsh ; 
and  when  the  last  red  streak  had  fiided  out  of  the 
sky,  the  full  sublimity  of  the  scene  burst  upon 
the  mind.  A  night  upon  the  prairie  is  worth  a 
day  at  Niagara.  As  far  as  the  eye  can  reach  on 
every  side  sweep  the  level  lines,  slowly  darken- 
ing as  they  approach  the  horizon.  Nothing  ob- 
structs or  limits  the  view  of  the  sky.     A  whole 
hemisphere  of  stars  looks  down  upon  you,  and 
all  the  earth  occupying  the  least  possible  angle 
of  vision. 
Just  as  we  were  camping  for  the  night  a  com- 
pany of  Red  River  carts  appeared  upon  the  hori- 
zon.     At  first  we  could  hardly  imagine  what 
they  were — for  a  moment  widening  out  into  bat- 
talions, and  then  shrinking  to  the  width  of  a  sin- 
gle company,  as  the  trail  came  directly  toward 
or  was  at  right  angles  to  us,  so  that  it  seemed 
as  if  we  were  gazing  at  the  evolutions  of  a  grand 
army.     As  they  came  nearer  the  illusion  was 
dispelled,  and  the  train  began  to  look  like  what 
it  was — a  huge  land  caravan.    Presently  we  saw 
galloping  ahead  of  the  train  ^-  young  man,  well 
mounted,  who  in  a  few  moments  drew  rein  under 
the  Stars  and  Stripes,  which  we  had  patriotical- 
ly hoisted  when  we  first  saw  their  white  flag  of 
march  fluttering  in  the  distance.     The  rider,  a 
young  M'Kay,  who  was  captain  of  the  train,  was 
well  mounted,  and  sat  his  horse  finely.       His 
clear,  bronzed  face  was  set  oft'  by  a  jaunty  cap. 
He  wore  a  cheeked  flannel  shirt,  and  each  shoul- 
der bore  its  fancy  wampum  bead  belt,  that  sus- 
pended the  powder-horn  and  shot-jjouch.     He 
had  upon  his  feet  moccasins  worked  with  beads 
and  quills,  and  carried  in  his  hand  a  short-han- 
dled riding-whip,  with  a  long  thick  lash  of  buf- 
falo hide.      Meanwhile,  as  we  exclianged  the 
news  and  friendly  questionings,  the  train  had 
approached,  one  cart  after  another  wheeling  by 
in  longprocession — scores  upon  scores,  each  wheel 
in  every  cart  having  its  own  individual  creak  or 
shriek,  and  each  cart  drawn  by  an  ox  harness- 
ed in  rawhide,  one  driver  to  three  carts.     The 
drivers  were  all  half-breeds,  dressed  in  every  va- 
riety of  costume,  but  nearly  all  showing  some 
flash  of  gaudy  color  in  the  invariable  belt  or 
sash,  or  in  the  moccasins,  and  politely  touching 
the  cap  with  a  "Bon  jour! "  to  such  of  us  as  stood 
near  enough  to  return  the  salutation. 
The  next  morning,  as  we  were  eating  break- 
fast, a  new  party  appeared,  which  soon  turned 
out  to  be  Sir  George  Simpson,  the  Governor  of 
the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  in  America,  and 
FOaT  ABEEOSOMBIE, 
CANTONMENTS,  FOET  ABEKCEOMBIE. 
his  attendants.  He  was  just  returning  from  his 
annual  visit  to  Norway  House,  and  was  only 
seven  days  from  Fort  Gany.  He  was  accom- 
panied by  relays  of  horses,  and  himself  rode  in 
an  old  buggy  at  a  spanking  gait.  The  voice, 
whicli  is  said  to  make  chief  factors  and  chief 
traders  and  chief  clerks  tremble,  and  which 
makes  and  mars  fortunes  in  Rupert's  Land,  was 
to  us  strangers  very  jilc.asant  in  its  tones.  Our 
eyes  followed  the  white  round-topjied  hat  and 
white  capote,  as  long  as  they  were  visible,  with 
great  interest,  until  we  learned,  too  late,  that 
one  of  the  men  in  his  party  was  Dr.  Rae,  the 
Arctic  explorer. 
A  few  hours'  ride  the  next  morning  brouglit 
us  to  the  Red  River  of  the  North  again,  where  it 
flowed  northwardly  six  miles  above  (/.  e.,  south 
of)  Fort  Abercrombie.  We  crossed  at  a  con- 
venient fordiug-place,  where  the  water  was  little 
liigher  than  the  horses'  flanks,  aud  galloped  on 
to  the  fort. 
North  of  Gr.aham's  Point,  as  we  rounded  a  turn 
of  the  river,  whose  wooded  margin  had  conceal- 
ed it  from  us  hitlierto,  we  came  in  sight  of  Fort 
Abercrojnbie— that  is,  of  the  one  building  erect- 
ed for  the  commander's  quarters,  and  the  canvas 
store-houses,  which  aie  built  upon  the  jirairie 
near  the  river  bank.  The  log-houses,  which  of- 
ficers and  privates  at  present  occu])y,  are  all  built 
in  a  quadrangle  upon  a  pear-shaped  promontory, 
surrounded  by  water,  aud  a  trifle  lower  tlian  tlic 
level  of  the  prairie.  The  view  on  the  preceding 
page  is  taken  from  the  neck  of  this  pear-sha])ed 
promontoiy,  looking  west  toward  the  prairie. 
The  view  above  is  taken  from  the  same  spot, 
back  to  back,  looking  cast  toward  the  interior  of 
the  cantonment. 
Here  were  our  old  stage-coach   friends,   the 
Englishmen,  quartered  in  their  tents,  and  the 
Scotch  lasses,  by  the  kindness  of  Captain  Davis, 
quartered  in  one  of  the  completed  rooms  of  the 
building  shoim  in  the  first  sketch,  where  they 
were  awaiting  the  construction  of  their  batteau. 
Joseph  found  an  old  friend  in  the  sutler  of 
the  fort,  and  by  him  we  were  introduced  to  the 
commander  and  princiijal  officers.  We  enjoyed 
their  hearty  hospitality  for  the  remainder  of  "the 
day  and  niglit.  As  we  sat  in  the  Captain's  quar- 
ters at  tlie  close  of  the  afternoon,  smoking  out 
tlie  mosquitoes  with  Manilla  cheroots,  and  listen- 
ing to  his  entertaining  accounts  of  life  on  the 
border,  an  orderly  brought  news  of  another  train 
wishing  to  cross  the  river  at  this  point.  Pres- 
ently they  came  along,  the  cattle  bearing  new 
armies  of  mosquitoes  over  the  neck,  and  through 
the  cantonment  to  the  place  where  the  Anson 
Norlimp  was  moored. 
Wheeling  their  loaded  carts  on  the  boat,  they 
swung  it  back  and  forth,  from  shore  to  sliore,  til! 
all  were  ferried  over,  then  drove  their  oxen  into 
the  water,  swimming  them  across,  and  camped 
in  the  woods  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river. 
The  Captain  gave  Joseph  and  myself  a  whole 
house  to  ourselves  that  night,  with  straw  beds, 
which  were  a  luxury  after  the  cold  ground ;  and 
the  delicious  coolness  of  the  room,  with  not  a 
mosquito  to  sting  or  sing,  soon  sent  us  to  sleep, 
the  last  sounds  tliat  fell  upon  our  ears  being  tin 
songs  of  tlie  half-breeds  over  the  river— songs 
of  their  own  nation,  and  of  Sioux  and  Chippe- 
wa braves— rising  and  foiling  in  monotonous 
cadences  till  all  were  alike  unheard. 
The  steamboat  Auson  Northup  deserves  an 
epic.  Here  is  the  argument,  to  which  I  hope 
some  one  will  yet  gird  himself  to  wi-ite  a 
poem. 
Late  in  flie  winter  of  1858-'9,  jlr.  Anson 
Northup,  having  run  liis  boat  up  tlie  Crow 
Wing  Kiver,  a  tributary  of  the  Mississipjji, 
tlie  previous  fall,  took  it  to  pieces,  paciced  the 
cabin,  machinery,  and  timber  for  building  the 
hull,  on  sleighs,  which,  with  great  difficulty, 
were  drawn  by  horses  and  oxen  across  to  Otter 
Tail  Lake,  and  thence  westward  to  the  mouth 
of  the  Cheyenne  on  the  Red  River.  Assisted 
by  the  St.  Paul  Chamber  of  Commerce,  but 
mainly  depending  on  his  own  private  resources, 
and  by  hard  work  and  jjcrseverance,  the  boat 
was  rebuilt  on  the  banks  of  Red  River,  and 
launched  snccessfiilly  on  the  10th  of  May,  and, 
as  the  breaking  bottle  drenched  the  planks,  was 
christened  the  Anson  Northnp.  In  the  high- 
water  of  early  spring  she  made  her  trial-trip 
down  to  Fort  Garry  and  back.  She  had  to  lie 
by  every  night,  of  course,  and  must  have  been 
greatly  delayed  by  the  necessity  of  stopjjing  to 
cut  timber  for  the  fire.  In  spite  of  these  delays, 
she  made  the  return  trip  in  eight  days;  and  what 
must  the  quiet  Selkirkers  have  thought  of  the 
American  steamboat  ?  Tlie  Albany  burgomas- 
ters were  not  more  amazed  by  the  sound  of  the 
Chancellor  Livinf/slon's  paddles. 
And  now  about  the  navigation  of  Red  River. 
Such  navigation  is  undoubtedly  feasible.  The 
boat's  two  trips  to  Fort  Gariy  have  demonstrated 
it.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  fall,  and  in  the  win- 
ter of  course,  it  is  impracticable.  After  the  ice 
breaks  up,  which  usually  happens  about  the  1st 
of  May,  the  water  is  veiy  high,  and  the  river  is 
navigable  to  as  large  steambo.ats  as  can  make  all 
the  turns  in  the  winding  river,  from  Fort  Aber- 
crombie  to  the  mouth  at  Lake  Winnipeg — near- 
ly five  hundred  miles.  After  the  1st  of  August 
the  water  has  fallen  sufficiently  to  reveal  serious 
obstructions  in  the  channel  from  the  fort  to  the 
mouth  of  the  Cheyenne  River,  its  largest  tribu- 
tary but  one,  entering  Red  River  fifty  or  sixty 
miles  below  the  fort.  But  from  this  jioint  to  its 
mouth  it  is  easily  navigable  in  the  lowest  stages 
of  water,  until  the  ice  forms  in  early  November. 
The  success  of  the  boat  works  a  revolution  in 
the  Com]]any's  business.  Hereafter  the  annual 
outfit  and  returns  will  pass  through  the  United 
States,  instead  of  by  the  difficult  and  cii-cuitous 
passage  of  Hudson's  Bay,  to  York  and  Moose 
Factories. 
The  train  did  not  cross  the  river  above  the 
fort  as  we  did,  but  continued  on  for  about  fifty 
miles  down  the  east  side  of  the  river  to  the 
Cheyenne  Crossing,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Chey- 
enne River.  Joseph  and  I,  who  had  remained 
behind,  crossed  the  river  on  the  Anson  Nortlwp, 
swimming  our  horses.  We  therefore  had  to 
ride  thirty-four  miles  on  the  trail  of  the  train, 
doing  their  two  days'  travel  in  one  day,  and  that 
the  hottest  of  the  season.  The  air  "was  really 
furnace-like,  reminding  one  of  the  accounts  from 
India  of  the  scorching  heats  of  mid-day  in  that 
more  tropical  climate. 
But  when  we  got  to  camp,  two  hours  after 
sunset,  there  was  still  no  rest  for  us.  Mosqui- 
toes abounded,  biting  our  hands,  and  necks,  and 
faces,  as  we  cooked  our  sujipcrs,  and  flying  into 
our  eyes  and  mouths  whenever  we  dared  to  open 
either.  At  this  season  of  the  year  mosquitoes 
are  the  intolerable  curse  of  travelers,  the  little 
black  fly  the  tolerable  curse,  and  wood-ticks  the 
curse.  As  for  the  rest  of  the  entomological  cre- 
ation, they  bear  no  comparison  with  these  in 
their  power  of  inflicting  annoyance  and  petty 
misery  upon  the  human  race ;  and  one  soon  gets 
the  habit,  I  fouml,  of  brushing  a  spider  from  his 
fiice,  an  ant  from  his  neck,  or  taking  any  creep- 
ing, crawling  thing  from  the  inside  of  his  near- 
-rf  si^gfc- 
m  W 
TJIB     'aHSON  NOETHUP." 
TUE  &MUDGE. 
est  piece  of  clothing,  with  the  same  indifference 
with  which  he  brushes  away  a  house-fly  in 
Christian  lands.  But  inasmuch  as  wood-ticl<s 
burrow  into  and  under  tlie  skin,  and  stick  fast 
and  swell,  and  whereas  these  buffalo-gnats  swarm 
in  millions,  and  of  a  hot,  sultiy  afternoon,  when 
little  wind  is  stirring,  will  fly  into  the  eyes,  ears, 
and  nostrils  by  scores ;  and  whereas  mosquitoes 
buzz,  and  pierce,  and  suck,  and  sing  by  the  thou- 
sand and  tens  of  thousands,  biting  the  hands, 
and  face,  and  ears,  and  neck,  when  we  ride 
through  timber,  and  stinging  us  into. wakeful- 
ness before  sunrise,  cheating  us  of  the  delicious 
"  last  nap,"  and  stinging  us  into  a  passion  long 
after  sunset,  barricading  with  their  filmy  wings 
our  way  to  the  water,  and,  when  both  hands  arc 
occupied,  perforating  our  tenderest  cuticles,  and 
making  of  our  level  skin  a  rolling  prairie  of 
blotches  and  pimples  for  disturbing  their  ancient 
and  solitary  reign,  it  becomes  nccessaiy  to  sleep, 
comfort,  and  happiness  that  traveling  mankind 
should  resort  to  the  smudge. 
A  few  brands  of  rotten  wood  from  the  camp- 
fire,  covered  with  dried  grass  and  green  grass, 
make  a  smudge  about  equally  unendurable, 
whether  inhaled  by  men  or  mosquitoes ;  though 
of  the  two  evils,  mosquito  or  smudge,  men  pre- 
fer to  endure  that  which  is  not  quite  intermina- 
ble, though  it  may  be  almost  intolerable.  Horses 
and  mules,  when  the  smoke  begins  to  roll  up  in 
good  volume,  will  stand  over  it,  and  in  it,  till 
the  tears  run  down  their  long  noses  in  streams, 
rather  than  endure  the  torments  of  mosquito- 
bites  outside  its  protection.  Every  night  wc 
closed  the  tent  soon  after  dark,  and  smudged  it 
out  thoroughly,  before  going  to  blanket ;  so  that 
when  we  crawled  in  under  the  tent-flap,  we  felt 
rather  than  saw  our  way,  and  had  to  keep  our 
mouths  close  to  the  ground  to  get  enough  fresh 
air  to  live  on.  During  the  night  the  smoke  set- 
tles, fresh  air  filtrates  through  the  canvas,  and 
we  slept  as  comfortably  as  on  Howe's  spring 
mattresses. 
We  crossed  the  Red  River  into  Dakotah  Ter- 
ritory near  the  mouth  of  the  Cheyenne  River. 
At  its  mouth  it  is  about  one  Imndred  and 
twenty  feet  wide — a  deep  stream,  of  nearly  t\vo- 
thirds  the  volume  of  Red  River.  From  here  to 
Pembina  our  route  was  through  a  dangerous  In- 
dian country,  inhabited  by  hostile  Sioux. 
The  watch  was  doubled,  and  added  precau- 
tions taken  against  surprise  or  attack.  It  was  a 
novel  sensation  to  a  peaceable  man  who  had 
known  no  greater  danger  at  night  than  the  re- 
mote chance  of  being  garroted  on  Broadway,  or 
of  being  struck  by  lightning  while  sitting  at  his 
window  in  Ninth  Street,  to  betliink  liimsclf, 
at  every  sunset,  of  the  prospect  of  an  attack 
from  liostile  Indians,  or  a  stamjiede  of  the  liorses 
and  mules  gotten  up  l)y  tliievisli  ones,  and  to  ])re- 
I)nrc  for  such  prol)aliilities  i.)y  keejiing  his  ritic 
and  pistcjls  in  (jerfeet  oi'der — loaded  and  ca]iped, 
and  at  half-cock,  and  to  take  his  tura  at  the 
watch. 
Joseph  had  a  theory,  howcTcr,  that  the  Sioux 
were  oif  in  some  remote  portion  of  their  terri- 
tory, making  treaties,  and  when  his  watch  came 
around  generally  kicked  the  brands  of  tlie  canip- 
iire,  which  his  predecessor  had  carefully  put  out, 
into  a  blaze  again,  and  sat  down,  with  his  ]jipc, 
in  the  light  of  it — the  best  possible  mark  for 
prowling  Indians.  He  lives  to  tell  the  tale 
and  show  the  hat  with  a  bullet-hole  through  the 
crown. 
On  Saturday,  the  second  day  after  crossing  at 
Dakotah  City,  as  the  one  log-honso  at  the  cross- 
ing of  Red  River  is  called,  we  had  a  long  day's 
tr.ivel  over  ])rairie  where  there  was  no  wood  or 
water,  and  with  the  exception  of  an  hour's  rest 
at  noon  by  the  side  of  a  slougli  where  the  horses 
could  manage  to  drink  a  little,  the  train  was 
kept  in  motion, from  eight  in  the  morning  till 
seven  at  night. 
About  five  o'clock  the  sharpest-sighted  of  us 
horsemen,  riding  ahead  of  the  train,  on  ascend- 
ing a  ridge  of  the  prairie  which  overlooked  the 
valley  of  the  Elm  River,  saw,  clear  away  on  the 
edge  of  the  horizon,  where  the  heat  of  the  snn 
nuule  the  level  lines  of  the  prairie  tremulous, 
and  seemed  to  fuse  earth  and  sky,  two  black 
spots,  motionless,  and  looking  like  nothing  that 
we  had  been  accustomed  to  see.  Tliey  were 
buifalocs,  of  course,  we  all  agreed ;  or,  as  Jo- 
se])h  frantically  exdain^ed,  "  Viaiuls  for  a  regi- 
ment of  Imngry  gods,  brought  to  us  in  the  pock- 
ets of  Jupiter's  old  coat!"  A  bull's  hide,  you 
remember,  with  a  bull  inside  of  it.  For  half  an 
hour  we  all  trotted  along  in  their  direction,  keep- 
ing together,  and  .still  wondering  whether  they 
were  in  reality  a  coujjle  of  str.ay  buffalo  bulls,  or 
some  huge  boulders  outraging  geological  ortho- 
doxy. The  space  between  the  sjiots  grew  wider 
—  they  were  bufialo,  browsing  along  on  the 
prairie,  and  still  unconscious  of  our  approach. 
Two  of  our  horsemen  tightened  their  reins  for  a 
brisk  canter,  and  led  off  at  a  rate  of  speed  which 
woidd  have  been  rtiinous  to  Jose])h's  pony,  or  to 
mine,  so  early  in  the  chase.  We  kept  on  at  a 
steady  jog.  The  wind  was  in  our  faces,  and  the 
two  riders  ahead  got  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
of  the  game  before  they  were  <liscovered.  Then 
we  saw  their  dark  frames  turned  broadside  for 
an  instant,  and  the  next  moment  the  chase  had 
begun.  We,  too,  joined  with  a  wild  hurrah, 
spurring  our  horses  to  their  best  gallop ;  ahead 
of  us  the  two  monsters,  flouting  their  shaggj- 
DASOTAB  OITT. 
inanes,  and  thundering  along  at  a  wonderful 
latc,  and  tlie  two  riders  after  tliein  at  full  speed, 
with  great  good  sense  beading  them  and  turning 
their  flight  toward  us,  who  were  coming  up  as 
fast  as  our  second-rate  horse-flesh  would  permit. 
[  was  riding  Dan  Kice,  now  as  ever,  tough 
and  lazy ;  but  by  plying  whip  and  spur,  and 
shrieking  to  him  like  any  wild  Indian,  I  got  him 
into  speed,  and  soon  neared  the  boys,  who  were 
now  alongside  the  first  of  the  shaggy  monsters, 
tiring  and  wheeling  away  as  the  stalely  old  fel- 
lows plunged  on,  heedless  of  the  galling  bullets. 
The  thrilling  excitement  of  that  chase  '.  The 
buflaloes  galloping  in  their  heavy,  headlong 
way,  as  if  they  knew  their  lives  were   in   the 
chase;  C ,  with  one  or  two  shots  more  in 
his  revolver,  and  determined  they  should  be  fa- 
tal, close  alongside  the  flanks  of  the  one  into 
which  they  had  emptied  their  barrels ;  and 
L ,  wild  with  excitement,  begging  for  an- 
other pistol  or  a  rifle.      My  pony  could  barely 
get  alongside,  but  at  last  he  did.     C drew 
back ;  and  I  saw  for  an  instant  the  red  spots  on 
ills  gieat  side  bleeding;  then  levele<l  my  light 
rifle  like  a  pistol,  with  one  hand,  and  fired,  the 
muzzle  almost  against  his  shoulder.  He  stag- 
gered into  a  quicker  flight,  and  in  another  direc- 
tion, away  from  the  larger  bull,  still  untouched, 
who  was  thundering  on  ahead.  He,  too,  tum- 
id. I  saw  my  chance;  left  the  first  one  to  tliose 
who  had  earned  the  right  to  dispatch  him,  and 
rode  in  such  a  wa)-  as  to  separate  the  pair,  mark- 
ing the  foremost  one  for  a  chase.  I  reloaded  as 
•ioon  as  possible,  all  the  while  at  full  gallop, 
bnt  net  gaining  an  inch  on  the  buffalo,  though 
close  upon  his  heels,  not  half  a  dozen  rods  away, 
ind  he  every  moment  turning  that  black,  shaggy 
iiead  to  the  one  side  or  the  other  to  see  his  pur- 
•^aer.  A  stem  chase  is  a  long  one.  Every  pore 
was  streaming,  and  I  threw  ofi"  my  coat,  tied  it 
behind  me,  threw  away  the  stirrups,  clapped 
iicels  to  pony,  and  yelled  him  into  a  faster  gait. 
I  never  knew  what  physical  excitement  was 
before,  and  thought  the  oddest  things  while  in 
that  exciting  race.  The  tones  of  my  own  voice 
amazed  my  mind.  I  wondered  if  I  should  ever 
ask  any  woman  to  love  me,  in  the  voice  with 
which  I  besought  Dan  to  fly  faster.  All  j^as- 
sion  and  pathos  were  in  the  tone;  and  yet,  some- 
how, though  the  blood  was  boiling,  and  I  was  so 
light  that  it  seemed  as  if  the  wind  blew  through 
me,  my  mind  sat  apart  and  wondered  how  it 
could  be  that  its  highest  functions  were  for  an 
instant  usurped,  and  my  heart  trembled  at  such 
living  f^mblance  of  its  noblest  moods. 
A  mile  or  two  of  those  tremendous  strides  be- 
gan to  tell  upon  the  hea\-y  creature,  and  his  gait 
grew  sensibly  slacker.  Dan  gradually  gained 
upon  him,  and  as  I  got  alongside  I  pulled  trig- 
ger. For  the  only  time  in  all  my  use  of  the 
rifle  the  cap  snapped,  but  the  cartridge  failed  to 
catch  the  fire.  BuflTalo-bull  tnmed  with  a  terri- 
ble snort,  head  and  homs  down,  and  made  for 
pony  and  me.  He  was  not  the  bull  to  be  in- 
sulied  by  snapping  caps.  Pony  wouldn't  fight, 
shame  upon   him !    but   gathered  up  his  heels 
quicker  than  lightning,  and  leaped  a  great  leap 
ahead  of  him,  and  around  to  the  other  side.  If 
he  had  turned,  two  horns  would  have  disembow- 
eled him.  Luckily  for  me  my  feet  were  out  of  the 
stimijjs  and  my  seat  was  firm,  or  I  might  have 
been  sent  kiting  into  the  air  and  down  by  bull's 
feet,  instead  of  enjoying  that  spinal  thrill  from 
Dan's  tightening  loins.  Bufi'alo-bull  did  not  fol- 
low as  far,  but  turned  and  made  oflT  at  a  small 
angle,  using  his  best  legs — four  of  them.  I 
brought  pony  to  a  stand,  toes  down,  drew  a  bead 
for  the  vital  spot  just  behind  the  fore-shoulder, 
and  fired.  Buffalf^bull,  that  had  galloped  on 
four  legs,  hobbled  on  three.  I  had  fired  a  little 
too  far  forward,  and  broken  the  shoulder-blade, 
I  had  no  more  cartridges,  but  walked  my  horse 
along  as  fast  as  the  bull  could  hobble,  till  an- 
other came  and  dispatched  him  later  in  the  day. 
One  of  our  party,  the  son  of  a  rich  Boston 
merchant — a  clever  scape-grace,  who  liad  trav- 
eled the  world  over,  and,  among  other  things, 
had  bought  np  and  killed  beef  for  California 
miners  in  '49 — superintended  the  cutting-up  of 
the  buffalo.  Axes  and  butcher-knives  soon 
dissected  the  huge  carcass,  and  two  carts  were 
loaded  with  the  meat  from  the  two  bulls,  and 
wheeled  into  camp  late  that  evening.  Rousing 
fires  had  been  built,  and  "  Bony,"  the  scientific 
co<jk  of  the  Agony  Hall  mess,  gave  us  all  steaks 
and  fries  and  "txjuillons"  that  night,  and  as  long 
as  tlie  fresh  meat  lasted.  The  next  day  (Sun- 
day) was  spent  in  jerking  the  meat — i.  c,  cut- 
ting it  in  thin  slices,  and  drying  it  in  the  sun  or 
over  a  slow  fire,  the  smoke  keeping  off  flies  and 
gnats. 
My  only  coat — a  corduroy,  with  the  pockets 
full  of  jjapers — liad  tumbled  off  in  the  buflTalo 
chase.  Monday  morning,  an  hour  before  sun- 
rise, Joseph  and  I  went  to  search  for  it.  We 
took  along  a  half-breed  bred  to  prairie  life,  with 
keen  eyes,  and  the  promise  of  reward  as  an  eye- 
opener.  We  had  for  a  base  of  operations  an 
imaginary  line  drawn  from  the  head  of  the  first 
buffalo  killed,  directly  west  half  a  mile.  I  knew 
that  my  coat  was  within  a  hundred  yards  of  that 
line.  We  searches]  for  miles  and  miles  around ; 
it  was  less  than  five  miles  from  the  camp  to  where 
the  carcass  lay,  but  not  a  hair  of  it  could  we  see. 
The  wolves  could  not  have  eaten  it,  and  it  cer- 
'.  tainly  stood  np  two  feet  from  the  ground,  a 
black,  liairy  mass,  the  most  conspicuous  kind  of 
a  way-mark.  But  we  might  as  well  have  looked 
for  the  track  of  Columbus's  ship,  left,  in  the  fall 
1  of  1492,  east  of  San  Salvador,  in  the  middle  of 
the  Atlantic  Ocean.     The  sea  is  not  more  path- 
'  less  than  a  level  prairie. 
The  next  Monday  aftcmoon  we  reached  Pem- 
I  bina.      During  that  week  one  day's  travel  was 
'  very  much  like  another.  Joseph  comfmred  our 
daily  topography  to  successive  pancakes  which 
we  seemed  to  }>e  tuming  off  the  immense  grid- 
dle of  the  horizon,  smoking  hot  from  the  fiery 
oven  of  the  sun.  On  the  right  of  us,  with  our 
glasses  we  could  see  the  distant  line  of  timber 
marking  the  northwarQ  course  of  Red  River; 
about  every  day  we  crossed  some  one  of  its  west- 
em  tributarios — first  a  line  of  blue  on  the  north- 
ern horizon,  resolvint;  itself  into  trees  wliiuh  wo 
graduiilly   ncarcd,    jihin^jed    into,    fording    tlic 
stream  wliicli    ran    throiij^b    tlieni,   and  omerj;- 
ing  on  the  other  side  to  anotlier  stretch  of  open 
prairie,  terminated  at  tlic  distance  of  twenty  or 
thirty  miles  by  another  timbered  stream.    Some- 
times we  had  no  water  but  swamp  water,  and  no 
wood  but  tlie  Imls  tie  var.hc,  or  "  buffalo  chips," 
which  gave  an  unpleasant  Havoring  to  our  cook's 
savory  pancakes ;  and  once  we  got  stuck,  late  in 
the  afternoon,  in  the  middle  of  a  huge  marsh, 
where  with  great  ditiiculty  we  found  a  bit  of  dry 
ground  big  enough  to  spread  our  blankets  on, 
going  supperless  to  bed,  and  waiting  for  daylight 
to  extricate  ourselves  fi-ora  the  wilderness  of 
sloughs  and  marshes  that  environed  us.      Elm 
River,   Goose  Kiver,  Turtle  River,   Little  Salt 
River,  I'ark  River,  and  their  numberless  tributa- 
ries, were  those  which  we  crossed.     On  the  banks 
ijf  Park  River  we  fjund  a  little  orchard  of  blue- 
berries, and  in  less  than  ten  minutes  from  the 
first  alarm  every  body  was  on   his  hands   and 
knees  among  the  bushes,  renewing  the  joys  of 
youth.      Strawberries,  too,  grow  tliicker  as  we 
advanced.     Tficy  were  near  bringing  one  of  our 
party  to  grief— one  whom  we  all  liked.     He  had 
a  habit  of  walking  ahead  of  the  train  for  a  mile 
or  two,  picking  strawberries  and  wool-gathering, 
and  besides,  was  very  near-sighted.     The  train 
stopped  to  send  after  fresh  meat — a  young  and 
fat  bull,  killed  by  L after  a  four-mile  chase 
— and  the  ijhilosoiihcr  trudged  on.  When  we 
were  in  motion  again  somebody  asked,  "  Where's 
T ?"  He  was  nowhere  to  bo  seen.  Some- 
thing must  be  done.  One  officious  personage, 
who  at  that  time  commanded  the  commander 
of  the  train,  said,  "Of  course  he  is  ahead,"  and 
objected  to  delaying  the  train  till  search  was 
made. 
Joseph  had  no  idea  of  leaving  his  friend  alone 
on  the  prairie,  and  relinked  this  volunteered  in- 
humanity with  the  information  that  he  (brute) 
might  go  on  as  soon  as  he  chose,  and  as  far  as  he 
chose ;  but  as  for  him  (Josejih),  the  train  might 
travel  till  sundown  before  he  would  stir  another 
step  till  the  missing  man  was  found.  So  ho  took 
the  sharp-eyed  Cree  half-I)reed  along  with  him, 
mounted  on  my  horse,  and  started  off  in  the  di- 
rection where,  during  the  afternoon,  a  spot  had 
been  seen,  which  the  man  with  the  spy-glass  had 
pronounced  an  Indian,  and  the  man  with  a 
field-glass  had  pronounced  an  elk,  and  we  with- 
out glasses  had  pronounced  buffalo ;  and  which 
it   was  thought  might   be  T .      The  train 
kept  on  slowly  till  it  came  to  the  first  wood  and 
water,  and  there  camped.  About  sundown  Jo- 
seph and  the  Cree  half-breed  came  into  camp 
with  the  philosopher  between  them.  The  rest 
of  the  story  Joseph  shall  tell  in  his  own  words : 
"The  last  authentic  recollection  of  the  phi- 
losopher was  during  the  buffalo-hunting  news, 
when  ho  was  seen,  like 
" '  Grout  Orion,  sloping  elowly  to  the  Wont,' 
hunting  for  strawberries  in  labyrinths  of  reflec- 
tion.    The  savant,  it  was  known,  had  lost  his 
spectacles  ;  .and  now  it  began  to  be  feared  that 
he  bad  lost  himself  in  the  bewildering  mazes  of 
his  strawberry  search.  We  had  not  gallojjed 
a  mile  befoi'o  the  half-breed's  quick  eye  caught 
the  figure — \vhich  had  been  buffalo,  elk,  Indian, 
and  what  not,  an  hour  before — standing,  ap- 
parently  motionless,  on  the  summit  of  a  distant 
ridge,  some  five  miles  off',  visible  to  me  through 
a  glass  only  as  a  vague  black  line  against 
the  sky.  A  very  anxious  interval  of  doubt  was 
passed  at  the  swiftest  pace  of  our  horses  before 
we  were  at  all  sure  that  the  dim  object  was  ray 
best  friend.  Speculation  gradually  dawned  into 
recognition ;  and  as  we  approached  him,  the 
geographer  of  the  Northwest  descended  from  his 
eminence,  and  saluted  us  with  a  bland  ;ind  quiet 
courtesy,  as  if  he  felt  quite  at  home,  and  was 
going  to  ask  us  to  take  something.  'I'lie  geog- 
rapher was  utterly  lost  on  his  own  grouiul,  and 
had  not  the  least  idea  where  he  was.  I'icking 
strawberries  he  wandered  outside  of  the  trail, 
forgot  on  which  side  of  it  he  was,  and  took,  of 
course,  the  exactly  wrong  direction  in  trying  to 
find  his  way  b.ack  ;  and  so,  after  wandering  for 
a  while  among  blueberries  and  eagles'  nests  and 
buffalo  tracks,  he  concluded  that  he  was  lost,  and 
deliberately  made  up  his  mind  to  cam])  there,  in 
sight  for  miles  around,  till  he  was  sent  for." 
UUFFALO   CIIA8K. 
TO  RED  RIVER  AND  BEYOND. 
[Sccontr  Dajier.] 
IT  was  tlie  miilLlle  of  a  hot  July  afternoon 
when  we  came  to  camp  on  the  south  side  of 
Pembina  Kiver — I'cmljina  and  the  Peinbinese 
over  the  way.  Joseph  and  I  put  on  clean 
shirts,  crossed  the  river  in  a  canoe,  and  went  to 
ask  for  our  letters  and  jiajiers.  The  mail-car- 
rier, coming  by  a  different  route,  had  arrived  be- 
fore us.  To  Magenta  had  been  added  Montc- 
-bello,  and  the  thirty  thousand  slain ;  and  tlicn 
followed  silence  and  newslessness  for  three 
months. 
Who  that  reads  the  papers  has  not  heard  of 
Minnesota  and  the  man  that  fignrc^d  in  oim'  New 
York  I'unih  as  a  runaway  with  tlie  Cajiitol  on 
his  shoulders?  Town  lot  sjiecnlators  striving  to 
have  the  Capitol  elsewhere  than  at  St.  Paul  (all 
but  Minnesotians  have  forgotten  the  name  of  the 
town  now — such  its  obscurity) ;  carrying  the  bill 
making  tlie  change  through  a  Legislature  too 
virtuous  for  cakes  and  ale,  and  then  getting  a 
double  checkmate  from  the  Chairman  of  the 
Committee  on  Enrolled  Rills,  wlio  ran  oft'  with 
the  Removal  Bill  in  his  |iocket — ran  off,  on 
snow-shoes  and  with  a  dog-lrain,  to  Pembina,  it 
was  said — ran  oif  to  Room  No.  27  Fuller  llonse, 
St.  Paul,  for  a  fact:  and  there  hibernated,  eat- 
ing Buri-eptitious  turkeys  and  bass  by  day,  an<l 
drinking  smuggled  whisky  by  night,  till  the  time 
of  legal  adjournment,  disappointing  the  couriers 
sent  out  to  overtake  him,  and  so  by  bad  means 
achieving  a  good  end,  and  determining  the  loca- 
tion of  the  Capitol  at  its  proper  place,  St.  Paul. 
Tho  runaway  Chaiiraan  was  Joe  Kolette ;  and 
here,  at  Pembina,  he  reigns  King  of  the  Border. 
Short,  muscular,  a  liullety  liead,  the  neck  and 
chest  of  a  young  bufl'alo  bull,  small  hands  and 
feet,  but  with  tough  and  knotty  flexors  and  ex- 
tensors forther  u]) ;  full  bearded,  cap,  sliirt,  nat- 
ty neckerchief,  belt,  trowsers,  and  dandy  little 
moccasins — so  be  looks  to  the  eye.  Inside  of 
all  this  there  is  a  man  of  character,  educated  in 
New  York ;  but  with  a  score  of  wild,  adventur- 
ous years  on  the  frontier  behind  him — a  man  of 
character  who  asserts  himself  always,  whatever 
the  right  or  wrong  of  the  assertion.  Of  unfail- 
ing good  spirits,  brimful  of  humor,  blue  tlu'ec 
days  in  the  year — no  more  and  no  less — sticking 
to  his  belief  in  a  breezy,  liealtjiy  way,  and  be- 
licring  first  and  iilways  in  Joe  Rolette ;  bospita- 
ble  and  generous  beyond  reckoning,  and  reckon- 
ing on  equal  unselfishness  in  return  ;  giving  you 
bis  best  horse  if  you  ask  for  it,  and  taking  your 
two  mules  if  he  needs  them ;  living  for  years 
where  he  might  have  made  a  fortune,  and  never 
saWng  a  penny ;  a  good  Catholic,  believing  es- 
pecially in  absolution ;  a  Douglas  Democrat  to 
tlie  spinal  column,  and  always  to  be  counted  on 
for  good  majorities  from  Pembina — threatening 
horse-ponds  and  nine  duckings  to  any  "  Black 
liepublican"  who  dares  settle  in  the  vicinity,  and 
opening  his  house,  and  larder,  and  stables  to  the 
blackest  Republican  of  all ;  always  working  for 
a  party  better  than  for  himself,  and  in  his  zeal 
for  public  ends  debiting  the  aggregate  responsi- 
bility with  the  morality  of  tlie  private  means ; 
lending  a  passing  traveler  his  best  butt'alo  run- 
ners for  a  hard  journey,  and  then  running  races 
with  them  at  the  end  of  tlie  second  day's  travel ; 
affectionate  to  his  half-breed  wife,  and  jiroud  of 
his  boys  —  miniature  Joes,  of  ditl'erent  sizes  ; 
swearing  by  Louis  Najiolcon,  and  proud  of  the 
French  blood  ;  too  generous  to  his  debtors  to  he 
just  to  his  creditors  ;  fond  of  his  whisky,  but 
undergoing  months  of  total  abstinence  for  the 
* 
_  ■  ^^^^fos^^^ftiSgie' 
JOE  BOLETTE. 
sake  of  his  wife ;  his  best  friend,  the  man  who 
is  not  hampered  by  the  laws  of  trade ;  his  worst 
enemy,  himself. 
Tliere  he  stands,  just  off  the  superb  horse, 
which  he  sits  as  close  as  a  Centaur,  lighting  a 
jiipe,  a  score  of  wolfish  train-dogs  yelping  about 
him ;  and  as  he  walks  across  the  inclosure  roll- 
ing out  a  sturdy  welcome  to  majilk,  who  sits  by 
the  open  window  waiting  for  him,  with  love  and 
patience  in  her  eyes ;  and  lifting  up  the  young- 
ster wlio  has  run  out  for  a  kiss — Ijiting  off  the 
kiss  with  a  Cree  sentence  to  the  half-breed  re- 
tainer standing  at  the  horse's  head  waiting  for 
orders,  or  a  Clii])pewa  salute  to  some  Red  Lake 
Indian  waiting  to  beg  for  ]JOwder  and  toliacco 
for  the  winter's  hunt ;  and  rounding  all  with  an 
English  damn  to  the  yellow  dog  whose  enthusi- 
asm has  entangled  him  and  his  yoke  between  his 
master's  legs. 
Joe  gave  us  our  letters,  brought  some  tobac- 
co and  fresh  pipes,  inquired  the  news,  showed 
us  a  room,  and  told  us  to  be  at  home  in  it  till 
we  left  Pembina  ;  spoke  an  aside  to  ynu  Jille,  in 
Nistoneaux,  to  lay  a  table  full  of  plates  for  all 
his  guests  ;  fed  us  witli  buffalo  tongues  and 
New  England  dough-nuts,  and  strawberries ; 
and  then,  with  fresh  pipes,  we  tired  the  night 
out  discussing  polities,  the  spring  hunt,  dogs, 
Joe's  exploit  with  the  Capitol  bill,  the  best  road 
to  the  Rocky  Mountains,  Governor  Gorman  and 
his  "I  too  am  a  soldier,"  Dakotah  and  the 
Sioux  Treaty,  Minnesota  and  the  Overland 
Route,  dog-trains  and  train-dogs,  and,  first  and 
last,  Louis  Napoleon  and  the  great  battles. 
It  was  three  days  before  the  expedition's  boil 
came  to  a  head  and  expelled  its  rotten  core — a 
tent  full  of  scape-graces,  who,  from  this  point, 
took  their  own  way  to  Fraser  River.  The  ex- 
pedition itself  convalesced  rapidly ;  and,  outfit- 
ting with  fresh  pemmican,  was  ready  to  start 
upon  its  travels  again  within  the  week.  The 
interval  was  spent  in  sight-seeing,  while  the 
horses  and  mules  rested. 
One  day  we  called  upon  old  Peter  Haydcn,  a 
settler  since  "eighteen  hundred  and  ever  so 
few;"  one  of  the  first,  perhaps  tho  very  first,  to 
lead  trade  through  the  valley  of  Red  River  into 
our  territories  ;  who  packed  his  goods  back  and 
forth  from  Prairie  du  Chien,  then  an  old  French 
tra|Jing-post,  when  all  the  trade  of  the  valleys 
of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  was  carried  on  pack- 
horses  from  Fort  Pitt  to  Philadeliihia  across  the 
Allcghanies.  The  old  man,  an  Irishman,  looks 
weather-beaten  now,  and  leads  a  qnict  life  on  a 
fivriu  whose  barley  may  be  boasted  of;  at  least, 
there  was  a  story  in  camp  that  one  of  our  s«- 
I'lni.t,  holding  up  a  stalk,  saw  two  heads  of  bar- 
ley where  less  fructuous  eyes  eould  see  but  one. 
The  next  day  Mr.  Kennedy,  the  clerk  in 
charge  of  Pembina  Fort  (two  miles  north  of  the 
mouth  of  Pembina  River,  on  the  banks  of  Red 
River),  a  Hudson  Bay  Company's  station,  call- 
ed, and  invited  us  to  visit  the  fort.  Four  of  us 
filled  Joe's  wagon,  drawn  by  a  couple  of  spank- 
ing bays;  Mr.  M'Fetridge,  then  the  Collector 
at  Pembina  (Mr.  Buchanan's  best  appointment 
INTEBNATIONAI.  BOUNDAfiY  POST. 
and  worst  removal),  with  a  friend  on  the  seat, 
drove  a  swift  black  pacer ;  and  four  horsemen 
galloped  along  beside  the  two  wagons ;  Joe 
mounted  on  a  superb  stallion  of  English  blood 
— "  Fireaway"  of  name  and  stock.     A  dozen 
dogs  followed  our  rattling  wheels  in  full  cry, 
barking  and  fighting. 
Three  cheers  as  we  passed  the  international 
boundary  post.  Its  inscription,  whatever  it  may 
have  been,  had  been  quite  effaced  by  the  hatch- 
PEMlilN.^    FORT. 
PEiUilNA,  A>'1>  MOUTU   OF   PEMBINA  BIVEK. 
ets  and  arrows  of  Irdians,  who  used  it  instead 
of  a  colored  boy  and  board  for  their  target. 
The  post  was  planted  by  Nicollet,  we  were  told. 
Later  obserrations  have  proved  that  it  is  370 
yards  south  of  the  parallel  of  49',  the  true 
lioundary  line. 
It  seemed  less  than  that  number  of  yards 
from  it  north  to  Pembina  Fort. 
The  lodges  around  the  fort  are  those  of  In- 
dians, come  in  from  their  hunts  to  spend  their 
proceeds  or  outfit  anew ;  some,  perhajis,  em- 
ployed by  the  Company.  Half-breeds,  however, 
are  the  ordinary  ' '  Company's  servants. "  The 
long  dwelling,  where  .several  fomilies  of  them 
lived,  was  on  our  left  as  we  passed  under  the 
high  gateway  of  the  fort.  The  store-houses  and 
store  were  opposite.  Facing  the  gate  was  the 
dwelling  of  the  officers  in  charge — whitewashed 
without,  scrupulously  ne.it  within. 
The  Scotch  sen-ants  and  half-ljreed  interpret- 
ers of  the  Company  were  standing  by  the  store- 
house ;  the  half-breed  women  and  children  were 
here  and  there  about  the  area ;  half  a  dozen 
Chippewas  stood,  with  arms  folded,  seeing  every 
motion  of  our  party,  and  bearing  every  sound ; 
hundreds  of  furs  were  hanging  against  the 
fences ;  and  through  the  smudge-smoke  issuing 
from  the  half-breeds'  quarters  we  could  catch 
glimpses  of  dark  eyes  and  babies'  hammocks 
a-swinging. 
The  river,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  cut,  runs 
veiy  near  the  fort,  and  is  eighty  y.irds  wide,  and 
twelve  feet  deep.  In  1856  it  rose  thirty-five  feet 
higlier,  whereby  the  Red  River  Settlement  and 
Pemliina  were  disastrously  flooded,  as  twice  in 
Lord  Selkirk's  time.  These  inundations  are 
periodical,  but   occur    at   long   intervals,  and. 
probably,  are  much  less  serious  now  than  for- 
merly, for  old  settlers  say  they  can  note,  of  late 
years,  a  very  considerable  enlargement  of  the 
channel,  both  of  Red  River  and  the  Assini- 
boine. 
St.  Vincent  is  the  name  of  the  town-site  op- 
posite Pembina,  in  the  northwestern  corner  of 
Minnesota  exactly.  It  receives  large  annual 
accessions  to  its  poll-list,  just  before  election 
times,  from  over  the  river;  but  ordinarily  its 
population  consists  of  a  dozen  half-breeds,  with 
dogs  and  mosquitoes,  ad  lib. 
One  of  the  last  evenings  of  our  stay  in  Pem- 
bina we  were  invited  to  a  half-breed  dance  over 
the  river.  We  crossed  in  a  crazy  dug-out,  of 
precarious  equilibrium,  and  heard  the  jiggish 
fiddle  before  we  reached  the  house.  The  half- 
breed  who  had  rowed  us  over  stopped  at  a  lodge 
beside  the  ])ath  to  wake  up  two  dark-skinned 
maidens  and  invite  them  to  the  dance.  We 
caught  a  glimpse  of  them  rising  from  their  bed 
of  robes,  their  faces  lit  up  by  pleasure  at  the 
news,  as  much  as  by  tlie  burning  shred  of  cotton 
which  floated  on  a  basin  of  tallow  on  the  ground 
in  tlic  middle  of  the  lodge.  Opening  the  door, 
and  entering  the  log-house  where  the  dance  was 
briskly  going  ,on,  we  were  greeted  by  a  chorus 
of  Ho!  ho!  bo! — the  universal  salutation  of  the 
aboriginal  (total  and  semi).  The  fiddle  did  not 
cease  its  scraping,  nor  the  heels  of  the  dancers 
for  a  moment  intermit  their  vibrant  thumps  on 
the  plank  floor.  The  scene  was  a  wild  one, 
though  within  four  walls.  A  huge  mud  chim- 
ney, with  an  o])en  fire-place  at  the  right,  a  four- 
posted  bed,  with  blankets  only,  in  the  further 
left-hand  corner ;  one  or  two  chairs,  which  were 
politely  handed  to  the  strangers ;  and  all  around 
BALL   AT   i'Elllil.SA. 
the  room,  sitting  upon  the  floor  as  Indians  and 
tailors  sit,  were  half-lireed  men  and  women,  boys 
and  girls — twenty  or  tliirty  in  all ;  one  mother, 
with  bare  breast,  suckling  her  babe ;  another 
busy  in  keeping  her  little  one's  toddling  feet  out 
of  the  pan  of  melted  grease  low  on  the  mud 
hearth,  with  a  cotton  rag  hanging  over  the  edge, 
alight,  which  made  snch  dark  shadows  in  among 
the  groups  in  strange  places,  shadow  and  light 
alternating  against  the  rafters  and  the  roof  as 
the  figures  of  the  dance  changed. 
Jigs,  reels,  and  quadrilles  were  danced  in  rap- 
id succession  to  the  sound  of  that  "  dem'd  hor- 
rid grinil,"  fresh  dancers  taking  the  place  of 
those  on  the  floor  every  two  or  three  moments. 
The  m6n  were  stripped  to  shirt,  trowsers,  belt, 
and  moccasins ;  and  the  women  wore  gowns 
which  had  no  hoops.  A  vigorous  shutlie  from 
some  thick-lipped  young  dancer,  with  his  legs 
in  flour-sacks,  or  a  lively  movement  of  some 
wrinkled  hag,  trying  to  renew  the  pleasures  and 
activity  of  her  youth,  would  call  out  a  loud 
chorus  of  admiring  "Ho!  ho!  ho!"  and,  fired 
by  contagious  enthusiasm,  a  black-eyed  beauty 
in  blue  calico,  and  a  strapping  hois  hrttle^  would 
jump  up  from  the  floor  and  outdo  their  prede- 
cessors in  vigor  and  velocity — the  lights  and 
shadows  chasing  each  other  faster  and  faster 
over  the  rafters ;  the  flame,  too,  swaying  wiltlly 
hither  and  thither ;  and  above  the  thumj/s  of  tlie 
dancers'  heels,  and  the  frequent  ho's!  and  the 
loud  laughter  of  the  ring  of  squatter  sovereigns, 
rose  the  monomaniac  fiddle-shrieks,  forced  out 
of  the  trembling  strings  as  if  a  devil  was  at  the 
bow. 
Perhaps  it  is  clear  that  here  we  saw  the  com- 
monalty. The  next  night  Joe  Rolette  gave  a 
dance  in  his  house,  and  here  we  saw  the  aris- 
tocracy of  Pembina.  There  was  the  same  en- 
thusiasm, but  less  license ;  a  better  fiddle  and 
the  fiddler  better ;  and  more  decorous  dancing. 
Joe's  little  boy  of  eleven,  home  from  his  school 
at  the  Settlement,  and  his  father-in-law,  of  near 
seventy,  were  the  best  of  the  dancers.  The  lat- 
ter was  as  tireless  as  if  his  aged  limbs  had  lost 
no  strength  by  exposure  to  all  weathers  and  la- 
bor, as  a  hunter  and  voyageur,  for  a  long  life- 
time ;  and  little  Joe  had  e.xtra  double-shuffles, 
and  intricate  steps,  and  miraculously  lively 
movements,  which  made  his  mother  and  little 
cousins  very  proud  of  him. 
In  the  intervals  of  the  dance  Madame  Gan- 
grais,  one  of  Joe's  lady  cousins,  sang  some  wild 
French  ballads  and  a  Catholic  hymn.  Those 
of  our  boys  who  were  singers  responded  with  a 
few  choruses — negro  melodies,  of  course. 
Monday  week  after  our  arrival  in  Pembina 
we  left  for  St.  Joseph — a  place  seven  railee 
south  of  latitude  49'%  about  thirty  miles  west 
of  Pembina,  and  likewise  on  Pembina  River, 
which  stream,  west  of  St.  Joseph  (or  St.  Jo,  as 
it  is  universally  called)  runs  (according  to  Cap- 
tain Palisser)  almost  entirely  in  British  terri- 
tory. Along  the  stream  from  its  mouth  to  the 
lakes  we  afterward  saw,  in  which  it  takes  its 
rise,  a  belt  of  prairie  on  either  side,  varying  in 
<--•■■ 
m^ 
6TaAWIi£UblliB. 
width,  and  covered  witli  trees— oak,  elm,  poplar, 
and  birch  the  i>rincii)al  varieties.  Our  road 
was  over  the  ojjen  jirairic,  two  or  three  miles 
north  of  the  belt  of  timber,  touching  it  here  and 
there  at  the  larger  bends. 
The  wonder  of  this  day's  travel  was  the  acres 
and  acres  of  strawberries  tlirongh  wliicli  the 
trail  passed.  Beds  of  them,  so  ttiick  tliat  kneel- 
ing any  where  you  could  fill  a  liat  full  without 
more  than  turning  around  ;  large,  ripe,  luscious 
strawberries,  tarter  than  those  in  our  gardens, 
whose  size  has  been  increased  at  the  expense  of 
a  riclmess  of  flavor.  The  wheels  crushed  clumps 
if  them,  and  were  reddened  like  the  wjjeels  of 
Juggernaut.  Again  and  again  we  were  temjit- 
ed  out  of  our  saddles  by  some  bed  of  thicker  and 
finer  berries  than  that  wo  had  just  left  the  jMiiit 
of  our  knees  on — gluttonous  6trawberr}'-bibbers 
every  one  of  us  !  When  we  could  eat  no  more 
from  the  vines,  we  filled  our  hats  full,  which  were 
devoured  in  the  saddle  as  soon  as  a  few  mo- 
ments' srjuare  trotting  had  made  a  place  for 
new  draughts  of  their  red,  ripe,  pulpy  delieious- 
ness. 
Some  ate  in  silence,  and  some  in  thankful- 
ness, and  some  in  wonder;  and  Joseph  mur- 
mured between  every  hatful  the  praise — of  An- 
drew Fuller,  was  it? — "Doubtless  God  might 
have  made  a  better  berry  than  the  strawberry, 
but  doubtless  God  never  did." 
Half  a  dozen  of  us  stofiped,  about  noon,  at 
the  farm  of  Charles  Rottineau,  which  is  on  a 
bend  of  the  river,  nineteen  or  twenty  miles  from 
Pembina.  Curet  need  not  have  been  ashamed 
of  the  iahhi  d'lu'ite. 
In  the  last  half  of  the  afternoon  we  drove  on 
to  St.  Josejih,  galloping  down  one  of  its  grassy 
streets  as  the  sun  was  sinking  behind  I'cmbina 
Mountain,  which  fills  the  western  horizon. 
The  city  was  deserted  ;  its  one  hundred  houses 
were  nearly  all  shut  and  barred,  their  accustomed 
inmates  gone  to  the  summer  bufialo-hunt.  A 
score  or  so  of  half-breeds,  very  young,  or  very 
old,  or  lame,  most  of  them,  gathered  around  our 
camj)-fire ;  but  of  the  hundreds  whom  we  saw- 
on  our  return  journey  there  were  now  no  signs. 
Many  that  were  unable  to  accompany  the  bri- 
gade to  the  ])lains  had  moved  away  from  their 
homes  in  St.  Joseph,  and  lived  in  lodges  near 
Forts  Garry  and  rembiua,  for  fear  of  the  hostile 
Sioux. 
The  houses  were  nearly  all  of  hewn  logs,  mud- 
dcd  in  the  chinks,  generally  one  luit  sometimes 
two  stories  in  height,  with  a  single  chimney. 
Mr.  N.  W.  Kittson  has  his  large  trading-house 
inclosed  within  a  high  stockiide;  the  nunneiy 
and  church  are  larger  buildings  than  the  aver- 
age ;  and  one  or  two  are  frame-houses,  who.se 
boards  came  from  the  saw-mill,  which  adjoins 
the  church,  and  was  built  by  its  thrifty  priest; 
but,  with  these  exceptions,  the  houses  are  veri- 
much  alike. 
St.  Jo  is  a  place  of  considerable  present  and 
greater  prospective  importance.  It  is  on  our 
frontier,  the  best  of  all  sites  for  a  much-needed 
frontier  fort,  in  the  midst  of  a  rich  agricultural 
countr)-,  adjoining  the  great  settlement  of  North- 
western Hriiish  America,  and  is  near  the  water- 
course which  leads  into  our  own  teiTitory,  and 
insures  to  our  benefit  somewhat  of  the  riches 
of  the  great  Northwestern  areas,  both  now  and 
when  the  advancing  tide  of  settlements  shall 
have  swept  over  the  great  valleys  and  left  them 
populous. 
Since  ISoO  the  Sioux  have  stolen  from  the 
I<;oplc  of  St.  Jo  more  than  four  hundred  horses, 
many  of  them  buffalo-runners,  commanding  from 
one  to  three  hundred  dollars  each,  and  often  the 
only  jiroperty  and  sole  means  of  support  which 
their  owners  had.  In  the  same  time  a  still  larg-^ 
er  number  of  horned  cattle  have  been  stolen. 
Worse  than  all,  every  year  has  seen  some  deaths 
at  the  hands  of  the  Sioux.  In  the  absence  of 
the  hunters  the  Indian  lurks  about  the  place, 
shooting  and  scalping,  sometimes  in  open  day- 
light, those  who  stray  away  from  the  principal 
streets,  and  at  night  firing  into  windows  heed- 
lessly left  unshuttered,  or  falling  npon  some 
helpless  man  or  woman  who  has  ventured  to 
cross  the  field  to  a  ncighlrar's  house. 
At  times  the  half-breeds   have  taken  their 
wrongs  into  their  own  hands,  and  have  done 
their  best  to  riglit  them.  lu  the  occasional  bat- 
tles which  have  occurred  they  have  exhibited  a 
superior  bravery  and  skill,  one  of  their  number 
being  reckoned  the  equal  of  about  half  a  dozen 
of  any  Indian  tribe.  They  are  the  best  of  horse- 
men. The  Sioux  must  dismount  to  fire  with 
accuracy.  A  half-breed,  from  long  practice  in 
the  buftalo  hunts,  will  fire  from  horseback  at  full 
gallop  without  even  taking  a  sight  along  the  bar- 
rel, and  that,  too,  with  great  rapidity  and  dead- 
ly effect,  delivering  half  a  dozen  shots,  before, 
behind,  and  on  either  side  of  him,  while  his 
horse  is  making  a  flying  circuit  within  gun-shot 
distance  of  a  Sioux  war-jiarty. 
When  St.  Jo  was  laid  out  by  the  original  set- 
tlers, each  man  was  allotted  not  merely  a  por- 
tion of  land  sufficient  for  house  and  garden  with- 
in the  limits  of  the  city,  but  also  a  farm  fronting 
on  tlie  Pembina  River,  and  therefore  combining 
plenty  of  timber  witli  the  rich  prairie  land.  Few 
of  these  farms,  however,  are  cultivated.  The 
people  of  St.  Jo,  like  tlie  French  half-ljreeds  of 
Red  River,  are  buffiilo-hunters  by  profession. 
In  the  early  spring  their  work  begins.  Before 
the  snow  is  off  the  ground  those  who  are  intend- 
ing to  go  out  in  tjie  first  summer  hunts  begin  to 
look  about  after  their  horses  and  carts  and  cart- 
oxen.  If  they  have  no  horses,  they  buy  or  hire 
them.  If  they  have  no  carts,  they  set  to  work 
to  make  them  —  quisque  su(B  cartcE  faher  est. 
There  are  no  mechanics  among  them.  Such 
things  as  they  can  not  buy  of  the  English  or 
American  traders  they  make  for  themselves  or 
go  without ;  so  that  nearly  every  able-bodied  man 
is  a  chair-maker,  house-builder,  blacksmith,  or 
wagon-maker,  as  occasion  demands.  These 
carts  thus  made  are,  nevertheless,  all  of  one  pat- 
tern, and  enough  alike  to  have  been  machine- 
work.  "Pembina  buggy"  is  the  honorary  title 
which  they  receive  from  those  who  despair  of 
otiierwise  making  their  jolts  endurable — as  one 
might  call  the  stink-weed,  rose.  A  wooden  cart 
on  two  wheels  is  the  simplest  description  of  them. 
Wooden  they  are  to  the  remotest  parts.  Leath- 
er linch-pins  are  not  orthodox;  and  if  the  heresy 
of  iron  boxes  has  to  any  extent  prevailed,  it  is 
only  because  imported  from  St.  Paul.  The  fel- 
loes are  wide  and  never  tired.  The  bids  is  huge, 
and  sometimes  indulged  with  a  girdle  of  raw 
buffalo  hide,  nailed  on  when  wet  and  shiiuking 
tight.  There  is  a  neat  fence  high  as  the  wheel 
on  each  side  of  the  cart  body,  and  the  wheels 
themselves  are  large  and  enormously  dished. 
For  from  five  to  ten  dollars  apiece  you  may  buy 
any  number  of  these  carts,  so  cheaj)  is  labor. 
Twelve  hundred  jiounds  can  be  piled  into  them 
on  good  roads  ;  and  even  where  there  is  a  slough 
at  every  half-mile,  and  a  corduroy  road  the  rest 
of  the  w.ay,  they  cany  seven  hundred  jiounds 
without  often  breaking.  The  draught  animals 
are  o.xen  almost  exclusively,  and  these  have  har- 
nesses of  raw  hides,  of  a  primitive  cut  and  of  an 
infinite  endurance.  With  as  many  carts  as  he 
'  can  afford,  and  at  least  one  fast  buffalo-horse, 
with  a  gun  of  the  Northwest  pattern  (price  48 
wholes.ale),  and  a  full  powder-horn  and  shot- 
pouch,  the  hunter  is  prepared  to  go  to  the  plains. 
But  he  never  goes  alone.  He  and  his  friends 
and  neighbors  make  up  a  brigade — large  or  small, 
it  is  called  a  brigade ;  and  the  brigade  is  a  trav- 
eling town  sometimes' — men  and  women,  horses, 
oxen,  dogs,  and  carts,  tents,  lodges,  frying-pans, 
=?«;;' 
,i*> 
BT.   JOSEm,   FROM    ^EiLlil^■A   MOUNTAIN. 
and  all  other  housekeeping  utensils  that  are  port- 
able, traveling  together. 
In  last  summer's  hunt,  for  example,  there 
were,  in  one  brigade  alone,  400  men  carrying 
arms,  800  women  and  children,  800  horses,  500 
oxen,  1000  carts,  about  200  train-dogs,  and  as 
many  more  mongrel  curs.  The  wants  of  these 
people  are  simple  and  few,  and  about  as  easily 
supplied  on  the  prairie  as  in  the  settlements. 
As  for  the  animals,  herbivorous,  they  live  on 
grass  and  water ;  carnivorous,  they  live  on  meat 
and  water.  The  brigade  desen'es  the  name  of  a 
traveling  community  for  another  reason.  They 
subject  themselves  to  a  code  of  laws  on  the  prai- 
rie even  moi'e  rigid  than  those  in  force  at  home. 
The  latter  end  of  June  is  the  time  of  starting  for 
the  summer  hunt,  of  August  for  the  fall  hunt. 
A  large  camp  of  half-breeds  on  their  way  to 
the  plains  is  a  sight  to  be  seen.  Their  dress  is 
picturesque.  Men  and  women  both  wear  moc- 
casins worked  with  gaudy  beads.  The  men's 
trowsers  are  generally  of  corduroy  or  Canada 
blue,  and  their  coats  of  the  Canadian  pattern, 
witli  large  brass  buttons,  and  a  hood  hanging 
between  the  shoulders.  A  jaunty  cap  surmounts 
the  head,  often  of  blue  cloth,  but  sometimes  of 
an  otter  or  badger  skin ;  and,  whether  with  the 
coat  or  without  it,  a  gay  sash  is  always  worn 
around  the  waist,  the  bright  tassels  hanging  down 
the  left  hip.  Into  this  are  thrust  the  biiffi^lo- 
knife  behind,  and  the  fire-l)ag  at  the  right  side. 
Although  it  was  not  until  tlie  writer's  return, 
with  two  friends  and  a  couple  of  half-breed  guides 
and  servants,  by  Turtle  Mount  and  Devil's  Lake, 
that  he  passed  through  the  great  buffalo  ranges 
where  the  brigades  always  liunt,  it  is  better  to 
give  the  particulars  of  one  of  their  chases,  the 
pemmican  making,  etc.,  in  this  connection  than 
to  defer  it  to  its  proper  chronological  place. 
Women,  boys,  and  the  supernumeraries  of  the 
brigade  drive  the. carts,  each  one  taking  charge 
of  two  or  three,  and  passing  his  or  her  time  in 
belaboring  the  forward  ox,  and  yelling  to  the 
hinder  ones  as  they  lag  in  the  march.  The 
hunters  are  mounted  on  fine  horses,  and  relieve 
the  tedium  of  the  slow,  wearisome  travel  with 
an  occasional  scamper  after  a  badger  seen  scram- 
bling to  his  hole  ;  or  a  shot  at  a  gray  wolf,  dis- 
turbed in  his  lurking-place  in  tlio  long  rushes  of 
some  deep  marsh  through  whicli  the  train  passes. 
Some  of  the  hunters  keep  at  a  considerable  dis- 
tance from  the  train,  on  the  look-out  for  Ijuftalo 
and  signs  of  hostile  Indians.  If  the  latter  are 
near,  the  train  divides  into  three  sections,  and 
travel  in  ))arallel  lines. 
The  lowering  and  raising  of  the  flag  on  the 
foremost  cart  is  the  sign  to  halt  or  start.  At 
night  they  gather  in  a  circle  called  a  corral, 
where  the  carts  are  ranged  side  by  side,  with  the 
shafts  turned  4owai-d  the  centre  of  the  circle, 
wliere  the  lodges  and  tents  are  raised,  and  the 
camp-fires  made.  The  drudgery  of  the  camp  is 
performed  by  the  half-breed  women.  Wlien  the 
train  is  in  motion  every  sejjarate  wheel  on  every 
cart  has  its  peculiar  shriek.     lu  camp  these  are 
silent ;  but  Babel  is  continued  by  all  voices,  each 
with  its  peculiar  shrillness  or  vehemence  of  lan- 
guage, by  the  barkings  of  all  tlic  dogs,  comjiass- 
ing  every  chromatic  of  the  canine  gamut,  by  the 
lowing  of  tlie  oxen  and  the  whinnying  of  horses, 
rolling  and  kicking  up  their  heels  in  the  grass. 
But  in  the  midst  of  it  all  matters  are  going  on, 
fires  lighted,  water  boiling,  potatoes  cooking, 
pemmican  frying,  and  bread  baking ;  and  before 
sunset  sujjper  is  ready  in  most  of  the  messes. 
After  sup])er  the  pipe. 
As  the  twiliglit  deepens  into  dark,  all  the  an- 
imals are  brought  into  the  inclosure  made  by  the 
carts,  and  picketed  there,  the  buffalo-runners  re- 
ceiving es])ecial  care ;  and  the  watch  begins  to 
control  the  camp.  Numbers  linger  about  the 
camp-fii-es,  smoking  and  telling  stories  of  buftiilo- 
hunts,  or  listening  to  some  older  man  as  he  re- 
counts the  early  distresses  of  the  colonists,  the 
wars  of  the  Northwest  and  Hudson's  Bay  Com- 
pany, the  long  journey  to  Prairie  du  Chien  for 
food  and  seeds,  or  some  attack  of  the  Sioux  upon 
the  hunters  in  a  previous  year.  But  before  the 
light  has  entirely  died  out  in  the  western  sky  all 
are  wrapped  in  their  blankets  or  robes — the  sweet 
odor  of  kinnic-kinnic  lingering  in  the  air — and 
the  low  voices  of  the  watchmen  are  interrupted 
only  by  the  long  bowlings  of  distant  wolves — 
long  and  exultant,  sometimes,  as  if  conscious 
that  they  are  about  to  begin  their  annual  feast 
upon  the  carcasses  of  buffalo. 
Early  in  the  morning,  before  sunrise,  in  the 
cold  gray  dawn,  dew  dabbling  every  spear  of 
grass,  the  flags  are  raised,  and  at  the  sign,  and 
sound  of  the  horn  sleepers  rouse,  the  tents  and 
lodges  are  struck  by  the  women,  the  oxen  har- 
nessed into  the  carts  and  horses  saddled  by  the 
men.  The  horn  again  sounds  and  the  carts  fall 
into  line,  and  the  hunters  mount  and  the  train 
is  in  motion.  After  about  two  hours  of  brisk 
travel  the  train  halts  an  hour  and  a  half  for 
breakfast,  and  then  pushes  on  again  till  the  or- 
der is  given  to  halt  for  dinner. 
During  the  early  part  of  the  day  which  is  to 
be  described,  no  large  herds  had  been  seen ;  but 
all  were  in  anxious  expectation  of  falling  in  with 
one  before  the  day  ended,  so  fretiuent  were  the 
signs  of  their  presence  in  the  numerous  trails — 
the  fresh  dung  and  the  trampled  grass  in  all  the 
marshes  looking  like  innumerable  heaps  of  green 
jackstraws. 
Just  as  the  leader  was  sounding  the  horn 
which  was  the  order  to  "  catch  up  tlie  horses,"  a 
rider  was  seen  galloping  at  full  sjieed  down  the 
hither  side  of  a  hill  by  wliicli  he  had  been  liid 
from  sight  on  the  rolling  prairie.  All  knew  the 
message  he  had  to  bring  before  hearing  it  from 
his  lips.  He  had  seen  a  herd  of  hundreds  stead- 
ily pushing  their  way  over  the  [irairie  toward  the 
northeast,  just  beyond  a  high  ridge  which  was  the 
limit  of  sight  in  the  direction  the  brigade  was  then 
traveling — nearly  due  south.  Tlie  oxen  tliat  had 
been  harnessed  were  again  loosed,  all  the  buft'alo- 
runners  saddled,  and  every  hunter  eagerly  ex- 
amined his  gun  and  ammunition.  The  horses 
too  knew  what  was  in  the  wind ;  and  the  more 
higli-spirited  ones  among  them,  wliich  had  been 
trained  to  the  hunt,  stood  shivering  witli  excite- 
ment, snuffing  tlie  air,  and  pawing  the  ground 
with  their  lioofs,  needing  a  man's  strength  to 
hold  them  in.  All  the  able-liodied  men  were 
speedily  armed  and  accoutred,  their  superfluous 
clothing  thrown  off,  sashes  tied  tighter,  and 
girths  buckled  a  hole  or  two  higher,  and,  in 
less  than  five  minutes  from  the  time  tlie  rider 
had  got  to  camp,  the  leader  liad  given  the  order 
to  advance,  and  more  than  three  hundred  horse- 
men were  steadily  trotting  southward  in  the  di- 
rection of  tlie  herd.  In  a  few  moments  they  had 
reached  a  ])oint  where  the  ground  began  to  rise 
gently  to  the  height  of  the  low  ridge  on  the  top 
of  which  tlity  would  be  visible  to  the  herd.  Here 
all  drew  rein,  while  the  leader,  with  one  or  two 
of  the  older  hunters,  dismounted  and  crept  along 
up  the  slope  to  reconnoitre,  obsen-e  the  progress 
of  the  herd  and  the  lay  of  the  land,  in  order  to  de- 
termine from  which  direction  the  charge  had  bet- 
ter be  made.  There  was  little  time  to  be  lost ; 
the  buft'alo  were  already  o])posite  the  hunters, 
and  the  old  bulls  ahead  might,  at  any  moment, 
take  a  trail  leading  over  the  ridge  and  in  full 
sight  of  the  train.  A  moment's  glance  told  ex- 
perienced eyes,  peering  through  the  tops  of  the 
long  green  grass,  that  the  ground  toward  which 
they  were  moving  was  a  rolling  prairie  with  ab- 
rupt ascents  and  descents,  and  therefore  full  of 
badger-holes,  dangerous  alike  to  the  horse  and 
his  rider,  while  the  ground  which  they  had  just 
passed  over  was  very  nearly  level,  with  here  and 
there  a  marsh,  and  fenced  in,  so  to  speak,  by  the 
stream  which  ran  hither  and  thither,  and  wound 
around  by  tlie  dinner  camp-ground.  Hastening 
down  the  slopie  and  remounting  their  horses,  a 
few  quick,  low  words  from  the  leader  explained 
the  order  of  the  charge.  A  dozen  or  more  of 
the  fleetest  runners  were  sent  to  the  westward 
around  the  ridge  to  head  the  herd  and  start 
them  back.  The  rest  of  the  hunters  gathered 
under  its  edge  arrectis  auribus.  The  ruse  was 
successful.  The  dozen  hunters  coming  boldly 
into  sight  directly  in  their  path,  and  spreading 
out  slowly  to  the  right  and  left  without  chasing 
them,  and  the  favorable  nature  of  the  ground, 
making  it  harder  for  them  to  go  to  the  one  side 
or  the  other  than  backward,  turned  them  almost 
in  their  tracks.  The  herd  was  not  so  large  but 
that  ven'  many  of  the  buffaloes  could  see  the 
hunters.  The  sage  and  long-bearded  veterans 
who  had  led  them  stopped,  w-re  crowded  ahead 
a  few  yards  by  the  pressure  of  those  behind,  and 
then  all  were  huddling  together,  cows  and  calves 
in  the  centre,  and  the  bnlls  crowding  around, 
until  the  leaders  broke  through  and  led  off  at  a 
steady  gallop  on  the  back  track.  This  was  the 
critical  moment.  The  dozen  hunters  shouted  at 
the  tops  of  their  lungs,  and  settled  into  a  steady 
gallop  on  their  trail.  The  three  hundred  and 
fifty  horsemen  came  flying  over  tlie  ridge  and 
down  its  slope  in  full  pursuit,  and  in  front  of 
them  all,  not  a  quarter  of  a  mile  away,  a  herd 
of  near  a  thousand  buflTaloes  in  headlong  flight, 
tails  out.  Leads  down,  and  nostrils  red  and  flar- 
ing. For  the  first  few  hundred  j-ards  the  chase  was 
"nip  and  tuck."  The  buffaloes  were  doing  their 
best  possible,  as  they  always  can  at  the  beginning 
of  a  chase,  and  the  horses  had  not  so  good  ground, 
and  were  hardly  settled  down  to  their  work.  But 
soon  the  tremendous  strides  of  tlie  buffalo-run- 
ners began  to  tell  in  the  chase,  and  the  hea\y 
headlong  and  forehanded  leap  of  the  buffalo  to 
grow  just  perceptibly  slacker.  One  after  an- 
other the  swiftest  of  the  runners  caught  up  to 
the  herd,  and  soon  hunters  and  hunted  were  one 
indistinguishable  mass  thundQiing  over  the  plain. 
The  gieen  sward  is  torn  up,  clouds  of  dust  arise, 
swift  shots  like  volleys  of  musketrv'  buffet  the 
air,  the  hunters  fly  along  with  loosened  rein, 
trusting  to  their  horses  to  clear  the  badger  holes 
that  here  and  there  break  the  ground,  and  to 
keep  their  own  flanks  and  the  rider's  legs  from 
the  horns  of  the  buffaloes  by  whom  they  must 
pass  to  get  alongside  the  fat  and  swifter  cow 
singled  out  for  prey.  And  still  they  keep 
up  this  tremendous  gait,  flying  buffalo  and  pur- 
suing horsemen.  As  fast  as  one  fires  he  draws 
the  ]ilug  of  his  powder-horn  with  his  teeth,  , 
pours  in  a  hasty  charge,  takes  one  from  his 
mouthful  of  wet  bullets  and  drops  it  without 
wadding  or  rammer  upon  the  powder,  settles  it 
with  a  blow  against  the  saddle,  keeps  the  muzzle 
lifted  till  he  is  close  to  his  game,  then  lowers 
and  fires  in  the  same  instant  without  an  aim, 
the  muzzle  of  the  gun  often  grazing  the  shaggy 
monster's  side ;  then  leaning  off,  his  hor.se  wheels 
away,  and  loading  as  he  flies,  he  spurs  on  in 
chase  of  another,  and  another,  and  another ;  and 
in  like  manner  the  three  hundred  of  them.  One 
after  one  the  buffaloes  lagged  behind,  staggered, 
and  fell,  at  first  singly  and  then  by  scores,  till  in 
a  few  moments  the  whole  herd  was  slain  save 
only  a  few  old  bulls  not  worth  the  killing,  which 
were  suffered  to  gallop  safely  away.  One  after 
one  the  hunters  drew  rein,  and  dismounting  from 
their  drenched  horses,  walked  back  through  the 
heaps  of  dead  bufl'alo  and  the  puddles  of  blood, 
singling  out  of  the  hundreds  dead  with  unening 
certainty  the  ones  they  had  shot.  Not  a  dispute 
arose  among  the  hunters  as  to  the  ownership  of 
any  buffalo  killed.  To  a  novice  in  the  hunt 
they  all  looked  alike,  differenced  only  by  size 
and  sex,  and  the  plain  on  which  all  were  lying 
was  in  each  square  rod  the  fac-simile  of  even.' 
other  square.  The  novices  had  thrown  on  their 
killed  a  sash  or  coat  or  knife-sheath  ;  but  the  best 
huntere  had  no  need  of  this.  To  their  keen 
eyes  no  two  rods  were  alike,  and  they  could  trace 
their  course  as  easily  as  if  only  four  and  not 
thousands  of  hoofs  had  torn  the  plain. 
The  carts  driven  by  the  women  come  up, 
knives  are  drawn,  and  with  marvelous  dexterity 
the  shaggj'  skins  are  stripped  off,  the  great, 
bloody  frame  divided,  huge  bones  and  quivering 
flesh,  all  c'lt  into  ]jieces  of  portable  size,  the 
carts  loaded,  and  by  sunset  all  are  on  their  way 
to  camp. 
At  St.  Jo  all  our  plans  underwent  a  change. 
It  became  clear  that  the  leader  ,f  the  expedition 
could  never  justify  the  "  lofty  and  high  sounding  i  pass  that,  with  his  necessities  and  his  wheedling, 
phrases  of  his  manifesto,"  and  that  it  was  even  '  he  obtained  more  than  his  wages  before  he  began 
douljtfiil  if  wc  shtjuld  be  able  to  get  through  the  his  work.  This  sort  of  credit  system,  liowevcr, 
mountains  before  snow  fall,  to  say  nothing  of  re-  is  usu#l  among  the  h:ilf-brceds.  Like  the  In- 
turning  overland.  One  of  the  scientific  gentle-  dians  they  |/ass  their  lives  in  paying  their  debts, 
men  returned  to  St.  Paul  from  St.  Jo  by  private  and  li.ivc  to  be  trusted  with  the  nicans  of  enabling 
conveyance.     Another  left  the  expedition  at  the    them  to  do  it. 
same  place,  preferring  to  go  to  the  Selkirk  Settle- 
ment. There  remained  only  our  one  geologist 
and  botanist  to  represent  science,  the  through 
passengers  for  Fraser  l{iver,  the  leader,  and  Jo- 
Michelle  Klein,  our  faithful  gtiideand  cook,  was 
a  better  than  average  specimen  of  the  half-breed. 
More  than  fifty  years  old,  he  was  yet  as  active  as 
a  boy,  and  liglit-heartcd  as  a  girl.     By  virtne  of 
seph  and  I.     Our  horses  were  growing  lean,  ex-    those  qualities   which  are  always  rare  in  anv 
„_.         ._i..  .       u     ,  ._        .     .    ,.      ,,      '  party  of  men,  early  in  the  morning,  during  rain- 
storms or  when  cattle  have  strayed,  he  became  a 
kind  of  jirivilegcd  character,  was  ]jemiitted  t<i 
joke  with  all,  and  the  one  to  wliom  all  jokes 
were  addressed,  not  worth  an  English  coat  but 
put  in  tattered  French.  lie  had  lived  his  pres- 
ent life  of  voyagcur,  hunter,  guide,  etc.,  for  thirty 
or  forty  years,  and  was  accomplished  in  it.  He 
had  been  a  guide  in  the  passes  of  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  north  of  the  Kootonais  I'ass,  for 
twelve  years,  and  his  knowledge  of  that  region, 
and  of  the'  valley  of  Fraser  Hiver,  and  of  the 
Saskatchewan,  and  Assiniboine  was  his  capital. 
Poplar  groves,  low  sand-hills,  and  marshes,  which 
the  ordinary  observer  seems  to  see  the  duplicates 
of  a  thousand  times  in  one  month's  travel,  were 
to  him  as  separate  and  distinct  as  if  the  whole 
country  had  been  majjped  with  minute  topog- 
raphy. He  never  failed  to  notice  the  tracks 
over  barren  ]ilaces  that  we  crossed,  buffalo,  elk, 
antelope,  or  human  footprints;  and  the  breath 
of  smoke  beyond  the  farthest  puqile  hills,  light 
and  evanescent  as  any  summer  cloud,  he  would 
at  once  distinguish,  camp-fire,  or  ]jrairie-fire.  A 
good  shot,  as  it  was  well  for  one  to  be  who  had 
gone  many  a  month  with  only  a  rifle  and  blanket 
between  him  and  every  fatal  possibility,  lie  didn't 
mind  a  ducking  for  a  small  bird  on  the  coldest 
day.  lie  knew  the  times  and  seasons  for  all 
the  game  in  the  valleys  or  on  the  prairie.  In 
nothing  more  than  his  views  of  astronomy  did 
he  show  how  completely  the  people  of  Hed  Kiver 
have  been  shut  out  from  the  rest  of  the  world. 
Indeed  he  represented  not  only  the  manners  and 
customs  of  more  than  half  a  century  ago,  hut  for 
his  theorj'  of  the  heavens  and  earth  he  went  be- 
hind Keider.  He  believed  that  the  sun  revolves 
around  the  earth  as  it  appears  to  do ;  conceived 
the  earth  as  one  great  plain,  this  side  the  only 
one  buttered  with  a  population,  and  merrily 
laughed  at  the  idea  of  going  westward  till  the 
west  is  east  and  returning  so  to  the  place  of  be- 
ginning.    His  arguments  were  those  of  the  Pope 
cepting  only  tough,  lazy,  imperturbable  Van 
Rice.  Joseph  parted  with  tears  from  Lady 
Mary,  exchanging  her  for  a  light  Indian  pony, 
to  whose  education  he  henceforth  devoted  all  his 
leisure.  We  obtained  at  St.  Jo  a  half-breed  at- 
tendant, determining  to  be  the  masters  of  our 
own  movements,  and  jilanning  to  go  as  far  as 
possible  with  the  expedition,  and  return  through 
the  buffalo-ranges  and  by  IJcvil's  Lake,  .nnd  the 
Siou.x  country  to  I'embina,  by  the  first  of  Sep- 
tember, ending  our  tour  with  a  visit  to  the  Sel- 
kirk Settlement,  and  an  overland  journey  thence, 
southwest,  to  Crow  Wing  and  home.  This  we 
did. 
"  Joe"  was  the  patronymic  of  our  French  half- 
breed  attendant ;  by  no  means  Saint  Joe.  Tall, 
muscular,  with  long  black  hair  and  the  mandililes 
of  an  alligator,  he  yet  walked  in  a  lame,  clumsy 
way,  and  wore  shoes  instead  of  moccasins.  Both 
his  feet  had  been  frozen,  and  of  one  all  the  toes, 
and  of  the  other  half  the  metacarpal  bones  also, 
had  been  amjiutated.  He  was  hunting  buffalo 
with  a  dog-train,  the  dogs  ran  away  and  left  him 
alone  in  the  snow,  where  for  ten  days  he  lived, 
and  nights  he  slept,  without  food  by  d.ay  or 
blankets  by  night :  on  the  last  day  rescued  by 
Indians,  who  found  him  insensible  and  nearly 
frozen  to  death.  His  work  was  only  to  take 
care  of  our  horses  and  mules,  fetch  wood  and 
water,  help  the  cook,  and  drive  the  carts.  A 
sinister  look  in  the  eye  was  the  index  to  the 
rascally  jjart  of  him.  For  three  or  four  days  he 
was  the  best  of  new  brooms ;  from  that  time  forth 
he  began  to  shirk  his  work,  finally  even  sham- 
ming crazy  and  playing  the  deuce  with  our  time 
and  attention,  till  we  had  driven  him  out  of  his 
lunacy  into  a  genuine  but  ignominious  stupidity 
equally  fatal  to  our  interests.  It  was  more  than 
the  fellow  was  worth  to  cart  his  one  hundred  and 
seventy  pounds  along  with  us.  But  of  all  this 
we  could  suspect  nothing  when  we  hired  hirn — so 
polite  was  the  rascal,  so  handy  at  mending  an 
old  cart  which  had  nonplused  our  metroj/olitan 
fingers,  so  guileless  in  his  speech.  We  hired  and  thepersecutorsof  Galileo.  The  water  would 
him  for,  I  forget  how  much,  a  month,  and  the  j  droji  out  of  the  rivers  and  lakes  and  sea  if  they 
next  moniing  after  the  bargain  was  struck  be-    were  turned  the  upside  down,  and  as  for  the  im' 
gan  to  pay  for  the  whistle.  He  must  have  pcm- 
mican,  and  flour,  and  tea  to  leave  with  his  wife, 
who  was  soon  to  be  confined,  and  then  some 
cloth  for  his  shirts,  and  then  a  pair  of  shoes,  and 
then  would  "my  master"  jdcasc  to  give  .loe  a 
sovereign  to  buy  wine  for  his  poor  wife,  and 
"  my  master"  wouldn't  think  that  Joe  could 
leave  no  money  with  his  wife ;  and  so  it  came  to 
mensc  plain  on  which  we  live,  why,  it  rests  on 
an  elephant,  and  the  elephant  stands  on  the  back 
of  a  tortoise,  and  the  tortoise  on  a  snake,  and 
the  snake  has  a  kink  in  his  convolutions  which 
gives  him  a  purchase  whereby  he  holds  up  all. 
From  St.  Jo  our  course  was  northwest,  a  di- 
rection which  led  us  along  over  the  prairie  at  the 
foot  of  Pembina  Mountain  for  two  days  and  then 
r. 
I 
across  it.  Pembina  Mountain  is  210  feet  high. 
In  Cict  it  is  no  mountain  at  all,  nor  yet  a  hill, 
but  only  a  terrace  of  table-land,  the  ancient 
shore  of  a  great  body  of  water  which  once  filled 
the  whole  of  the  Eed  River  Valley.  The  sum- 
mit is  quite  level,  and  extends  so  for  five  miles 
westward,  to  another  terrace  level  with  the  bufialo 
plains  which  stretch  on  to  the  Missouri.  The 
same  terrace  may  be  traced  northward,  and  south 
to  the  high  land  near  the  head  of  the  Sheyenne 
A 
iw 
i,    s 
Eiver  and  Devil's  Lake.  Of  the  prairie  country 
beyond,  and  of  the  Red  Kiver  generally,  our  ob- 
senations  confirmed  the  truth  of  Owen's  state- 
ment, that  the  limestones  of  the  Eed  Eiver  form 
the  basis  of  a  large  portion  of  it.  They  are 
highly  magnesian,  having  17  to  40  per  cent,  of 
alkaline  earth. 
I  Another  of  these  Nature's  steps  from  a  lower 
to  a  higher  level  may  be  traced  from  Turtlc 
Mount  on  the  49th  jiarallel  to  the  banks  of 
Swan  Eiver,  in  52'  30',  and  even  around  to  ' 
Basqua  Hill,  says  Sir  George  Simpson,  on  the 
waters  of  the  lower  Saskatchewan.  Like  Pem- 
bina Mountain,  this  ridge,  whose  sand-hills  we 
afterward  crossed,  was  once  the  shore  of  a  vast 
inland  sea.  %\'hen  its  height  determined  the 
boundary  of  the  great  body  of  waters,  not  only 
the  Eed  Eiver  Valley,  but  also  Lakes  Winnipeg, 
Manitoba,  and  Winnipegoos,  with  many  of  their 
feeders,  were  themselves  ingulfed.  The  largest 
of  the  three  great  fragments  of  the  primeval  sheet 
of  waters,  viz..  Lake  Winnipeg,  still  continues 
to  retire  from  its  western  side  and  to  encroach 
on  its  eastern  bank. 
Our  first  camping-place  was  in  a  cluster  of 
beautiful  oak  groves,  from  which,  at  four  or  five 
miles'  distance,  we  had  this  view  of  the  Pembina 
Mountain  plateau. 
Here  we  began  a  more  careful  watch.  At 
night  the  man  on  guard  pat  out  the  camp-fires 
as  soon  as  all  had  retired,  allowed  the  smudges 
to  smoke  but  not  blaze,  lit  his  p)]»e  behind  his 
hat,  and,  in  short,  "  kept  shady."  But  even 
danger  in  time  became  commonplace. 
Crossing  the  Pembina  Motmtain,  the  views  of  dis- 
tant prairies,  lakes,  streams,  woods,  the  glimpses 
which  we  caught  of  the  nearer  valleys,  and  the 
brooks  which  ran  down  them  through  sunny  and 
shady  places,  an  abrupt  wild  cliff,  with  here  and 
there  granite  and  limestone  boulders  tumbled 
about  on  clayey  shale,  tinged  with  iron  like  the 
redness  of  the  autumn  leaves,  the  richness  of  the 
green  grass,  the  strength  and  youth  of  the  green 
leaves,  filled  the  day  with  beauty. 
Of  every  day  the  beginning  was  a  sunrise  and 
the  ending  a  sunset,  with  the  whole  round  arch 
of  heaven  for  the  great  display.  Shut  up  in 
cities  we  never  see  all  their  beauty,  the  wonder 
of  every  new  day,  and  the  miracle  of  the  closing 
night.  Looking  out  of  a  window,  or  down  a 
street,  we  catch  at  the  end  of  the  ^•ista  a  framed 
glimpse  of  brilliant  coloring,  but  the  whole  large 
effect  in  the  wide  circle  of  the  heavens  we  utterly 
miss;  the  more  delicate  but  not  less  beautiful 
change  of  colors  behind,  on  either  side  and  over- 
head ;  the  grand  tidal  flow  of  light  descending  or 
of  shade  arising  in  the  horizon  opposite  the  sun : 
the  infinitely  various  tinting  of  its  clouds,  which 
no  succeeding  second  leaves  the  same ;  its  tender 
neutral  tints,  the  cool  grays,  and  the  deeper  blue ; 
and  over  all,  perhaps,  as  the  sun  goes  down,  a 
flaming  dome  of  red. 
The  next  day,  at  high  noon,  we  scared  up  our 
first  elk.  He  saw  us  when  we  were  half  a  mile 
away,  and  rtished  from  the  poplar  grove  which 
we  were  heading  for  to  a  more  distant  one  at  a 
rate  settinK  our  weary  horse-flesh  at  defiance. 
But  the  jirospect  of  killing  an  elk  was  no  more 
to  be  resisted  than  tlic  glimpse  of  office  flashed 
upon  a  hopeless  nominee ;  and  so  half  a  dozen  of 
us  capped  our  rillcs  and  cantered  along  in  the 
track  of  his  great  leaps,  faintly  hoping  to  sur- 
round him  in  some  of  the  poplar  clumps,  till  we 
saw  him  shake  his  antlers  proudly  and  plunge 
into  an  alder  swamp  two  or  three  miles  away, 
after  which  we  cantered  back  again.  That  night 
our  mosquito  and  gnat  miseries  culminated. 
Alkaline  water  in  the  swamps  by  which  we  had 
camped  ruined  the  flavor  of  our  tea,  and  gave  all 
our  horses  and  mules  what  Joseph  called  "an 
elementary  canal  enlargement." 
Speaking  of  mules  reminds  me  of  a  scnn7 
trick  my  mule  played  me  in  return  for  consid- 
erate kindness.  One  day  I  noticed  that  Mule's 
shoulder  was  getting  sore,  and  therefore  put  Ijan 
Rice  in  the  cart  and  saddled  his  successor.  Out 
of  respect  to  a  fraternal  affection,  rare  among 
human  brutes,  I  refrain  from  mentioning  his  in- 
disposition to  go  before  or  remain  far  beljind  the 
train.  Sixty  musical  clefs  would  not  hold  in 
their  bars  the  notes  of  his  bellowing.  But  pres- 
ently  strawberries,  red  and  ripe,  tempted  me  off 
his  bac;;.  Essaying  to  remount  Mule,  into 
whom  must  have  transmigrated  the  crazy  soul 
of  some  defunct  geometer,  he  suddenly  seemed 
to  behold  in  me  his  centre,  conceived  himself  a 
radius,  and  projxjsed  to  pass  the  rest  of  his  life  in 
describing  a  complimentary  circumference,  his 
tail  doing  the  tangents.  WHiirling  away  a  half 
hour  thus,  my  patience  became  Rarey-fied,  and  I 
made  a  desperate  leap  for  his  back,  caught  one  toe 
m  the  stirrup,  and  so  began  a  half-mile  gallop, 
outdoing  circus  Mazcjipas.  In  time,  this  became 
tedious,  and  I  jumiied  off,  lighting  on  all-fours, 
and  happily  ),reseriing  the  integrity  of  mv  meer- 
schaum, mother  Earth  receiving  me  in  her  green 
lap. 
No  one  saw  my  mishap ;  but  I  trudged  along 
quietly  after  the  vanishing  ass,  and  in  an  hour 
or  two  overtook  the  train  and  him.  Experience 
had  made  me  wiser.  Reviring  forgotten  high- 
bar  gymnastics,  I  got  him  where  he  could  not 
turn,  and  leaped  square  into  the  saddle.  Then, 
for  six  or  eight  miles,  siiurs,  bit,  and  I  fought 
Mule,  his  heels  and  his  liees,  and  helped  him 
conquer  them.  Poor  brute !  on  our  return  he 
fell  sick.  We  dragged  him  along  behind  the 
cart  for  a  day  or  two,  and  since  he  got  no  better, 
but  only  worse,  and  could  hardly  walk,  we  left 
him  on  the  open  jirairie,  cutting  a  heap  of  green 
grass  for  his  bed  and  board,  clipping  his  ear  for 
a  property-mark,  and  praying  that  the  wolves 
might  spare  him.  Good  old  mule!  you  sen-ed 
us  well,  and  I  couldn't  help  choking  at  the  throat 
as  I  caught  the  last  glimpse  of  your  long  neck 
stretched  out  as  you  lay  there,  "loth  to  believe 
that  we  would  desert  you.  If  the  "  stem  reader" 
derides  my  grief,  O  dead  ass,  you  shall  not 
meet  again !  Oh  for  the  Mustang  Horse  Lini- 
ment that  might  have  spared  us  all ! 
I  forgot  to  say  that  we  used  to  rest  in  camp 
one  day  in  seven,  Sunday  the  day,  as  often  as  was 
possible.  Then  our  trowsers  and  morals  were 
mended,  or,  at  least,  patched  up  to  ajipear  a  lit- 
tle better,  the  emigrants  greased  afresh  their  cart- 
wheels and  their  good  resolutions,  and  washed 
rCAlBIE  nUE. 
^  a 
MOUSE  BIYEE. 
away  their  sweat  in  the  nearest  river  or  lake. 
The  man  of  science  divided  his  time  between 
Paul's  Epistles  and  the  compound  microscope, 
and  gave  us  lectures  from  the  latter,  which  helped 
our  exegesis  of  the  former,  giving  us  wiser  eyes 
to  see  the  wonderful  works  of  God.  Another 
polished  the  hand  mirror  in  which  he  was  accus- 
tomed to  view,  in  his  opinion,  the  best  specimen 
of  the  "  noblest  work."  Joseph  and  I  indulged 
in  a  theological  disputation,  and  all  of  us  ended 
the  day  generally  by  gathering  about  the  camp- 
tire  after  supjier  and  singing  Old  Hundred,  Ba- 
lerma,  Dundee,  Ward,  and  other  tunes  of  that 
sort. 
On  the  first  of  August  we  crossed  a  valley 
called  by  Michelle,  our  guide,  La  Belle  Vallee. 
Its  appearance  was  like  the  deserted  channel  of 
a  beautiful  river,  such  as  the  Ujiper  Mississippi 
would  be  if  its  waters  had  passed  away  and  seas 
of  long  green  grass  filled  their  place. 
Mounil  Prairie,  a  plain  dotted  here  and  there 
with  mounds  too  few  to  make  a  rolling  prairie  of 
it,  and  with  one  regular  cone-shaped  and  higher 
mound  in  the  centre,  giving  it  its  name,  was  just 
ijeyond  La  Belle  Valli'e.  The  next  day,  from 
the  last  of  a  range  of  high  hills,  to  which  Joseph 
and  I  gallo]ped,  away  from  the  train,  we  caught 
sight,  for  the  first  time,  of  the  faint  blue  line  iu 
tlie  northern  horizon  which  marked  the  course 
of  the  Assiuiboine.  At  the  west  wore  the  range 
of  low  hills  beyond  which,  said  Michelle,  was 
the  Mouse  River.  Between  were  inniunerable 
lakes — some  salt  and  some  fresh — shallow  ones 
fringed  with  green  or  black  rushes,  and  deep 
ones  wooded  to  the  banks,  with  dark  shadows 
underneath,  or  surrounded  by  green  slopes,  and 
reflecting  the  whole  blue  of  heaven.  Away  to 
the  right  was  a  column  of  smoke,  where  the  care- 
less dropping  of  a  match  had  set  the  ]irftiric  on 
fire.  Mouse  River  ran  along  within  a  mile  of 
our  camping-ground  that  night;  and  the  next 
morning,  as  soon  as  breakfast  was  over,  Joscj'li 
and  I  hun'ied  on  to  its  banks. 
There  was  every  variety  of  color  in  the  beau- 
tiful landscape  which  met  our  eyes ;  brillianl 
prairie  flowers  in  the  foreground,  or  gi-owiug  iu 
the  de'bris  tumbled  down  from  tlie  blutf  on  whidi 
we  sat.  The  trees,  down  upon  whose  tops  wc 
looked — as  flying  birds  see  forests — the  rushes 
and  ranker  gi-ass  near  the  river's  margin,  the 
exquisite  cool  grays  of  the  sandy  beach  defined 
in  such  graceful  curves  by  the  brilliant  blue  re- 
flected from  the  water,  the  thick  verdurous  under- 
brush, here  and  there  sentineled  bv  .statclv  trees, 
which  CDvcrcd  the  lil^iiii  heyomi  the  river ;  the 
lisiiter  ^reen  upon  the  lou;^  level  nieailow  seen 
;it  the  ri),'lit  (if  the  river  in  tlie  sl<eti,'h,  with  troojis 
of  shadows  cliasing  each  otiicr  over  its  surface  ; 
and  far  beyond — miles  away — the  dark  l)rown 
of  the  opposite  cliffs,  and  the  faint,  hazy  blue  of 
hills  in  the  extreniest  distance. 
As  I  sat,  trying  to  put  on  paper  the  l)riefi;st 
outline  memoranda  to  recall  this  sjilendid  land- 
scape, a  large  gray  eagle  came  sailing  along  the 
air,  and  hovered  high  above  us.  1  fired  with  my 
rifle  and  hit  him,  knocking  out  a  few  tail-feathers; 
but  not  fatally,  for  he  only  tumbled,  fluttering 
three  or  four  times  his  own  wing-spread,  and 
then,  as  if  more  scared  than  inirt,  recovered  him- 
self and  flew  of}"  into  upper  air.  Al'terward  we 
saw  him  hanging  over  the  river ;  a  strong  breeze 
was  blowing,  but,  without  an  a]i]iarent  stroke  of 
his  pinions,  lie  kept  himself  steadily  poised  and 
balanced  in  the  same  sjiot,  head  bent  looking 
downward,  and  body  level. 
Here,  too,  after  a  long  chase  and  considerable 
"circumvention,"  wc  shot  at  the  first  antelopes 
seen  by  ns.  Their  quick,  long  juni]is  took  them 
out  of  rifle-range  too  soon  to  give  us  a  second 
chance. 
I  These  were  our  most  delightful  days.  The 
nights  were  pleasantly  cool,  and  we  slept  well 
des]iite  the  mosquitoes.  The  days  were  full  of 
enjoyment,  each  one  rewarding  our  labor  of 
travel  with  some  new  lieauty  af  landscape  or  of 
sky,  some  hidden  beauty  under  our  feet.  The 
horses  jogged  comfortably  along,  their  hoofs  now 
and  then  crushing  heaps  of  cacti,  which  remind- 
ed us  of  Southern  deserts  and  torrid  heats,  the 
comparison  cooling  us ;  or  the  cart-wheels,  as 
we  drove  through  and  among  the  clumps  of  white 
poplar  and  spotted  alder,  sinking  into  the  elastic 
caqiet  of  running  cedar  and  trailing  aibutu.s. 
In  such  places  .Joseph  and  I  dismounted  as  quick- 
ly  as  if  the  odorous  caqiet  was  from  the  loom 
which  wove  the  carpet  of  the  Arabian  I'riuce; 
and  there — hapjiy  as  jjrinces  ought  to  lie,  but  nev- 
er are — we  whiled  away  the  summer  afternoons 
till  long  shadows  warned  us  to  hurry  on  after 
the  train,  Joseph  reading  Tennyson  and  Ur}'ant, 
whom  he  carried  in  blue  and  gold  ;  the  tones  of 
his  voice  or  the  scratch  of  my  jicncil  never  fright- 
ening the  trustful  brown-birds  tliat  hopped  about 
us,  not  afraid  sometimes  to  skip  on  an  extended 
foot  or  arm,  where  they  stood  and  chirped  and 
cocked  their  tiny  heads  this  way  and  that,  but 
luivr  KLi.lul:. 
never  whispered  the  wise  things  and  the  secrets 
which  they  miglit  have  told.  Sand-hill  cranes — 
huge  birds,  delicious  to  eat,  and  worth  creeping 
a  hundred  rods  to  shoot — would  start  from  many 
hollows  as  we  came  up  over  the  nearest  hill,  and 
we  could  see  their  ungainly  majesties  putting  on 
airs  and  stalking  about  on  the  top  of  distant 
sand-hills,  taking  care  to  fly  before  we  were 
within  rifle-shot,  and  mocking  us  with  their 
clanging  cry  till  their  white,  van-like  wings  were 
faint  white  specks  in  the  distant  air. 
Monday,  the  Sth  of  August,  we  camped  near 
j  a  knoll  whence  the  Assiniboine  and  the  tribu- 
I  taries  of  Qu'Appelle  River   were  both  visible. 
Fort  EUice,  to  which  we  were  journeying,  was 
j  two  or  three  miles  this  side  of  the  junction  of 
'  these  two  rivers.     Onr  leader  had  persisted  that 
we  were  going  too  tar  north  to  strike  the  fort ; 
and  a  few  days  before  had  become  so  convinced 
that  his  own  practiced  ignorance  was  superior 
to  the  guide's  uneducated  knowledge  (for  Mi- 
chelle had  been  so  stupid  as  to  travel  all  over  the 
country  without  any  compass  save  the  sun  in 
bright  days,  and   the  compass-weed  in  cloudy 
ones),  that  he  had  ordered  our  line  of  direction 
'  to  be  changed  more  to  the  west.     As  a  conse- 
1  queuce,  the  next  day  we  had  to  return  to  the 
northeast — losing   one  or  two  days'   travel — to 
strike  the  fort ;  and  found,  when  there,  that  the 
scape-graces  heretofore  mentioned,  who  had  trav- 
eled over  the  two  sides  of  the  right-angled  trian- 
gle whose  hypothenuse  we  described,  had  passed 
two  or  three  days  before — though,  to  be  sure,  we 
had  had  science  and  a  fearful  amount  of  expe- 
rience in  our  aid;  and  they  had  stupidly  fol- 
lowed their  noses  and  the  advice  of  those' who, 
like  Michelle,  had  been  over  the  road. 
Early  the  next  morning  we  struck  the  hunt- 
ers' trail  from  Fort  EUice  (S.W.)  to  Moosehead 
Mountain,  and  gallojied  our  horses  in  its  ruts  for 
miles  in  a  frenzy  of  delight.  It  was  the  road 
which  led  to  London  and  Paris  and  New  York, 
and  all  the  centres  of  civilization  and  wealth  and 
knowledge  in  the  world.  For  days  and  days  we 
had  gone  pathless ;  but  here  was  a  trail,  and  all 
along  its  triple  tracks— miles  away,  to  be  sure— 
were  lying  the  beauties  and  the  wonders  of  the 
world,  and  home  and  friends. 
On  we  galloped,  homeward,  for  a  dozen  miles 
or  so,  Joseph  and  I,  and  got  to  Fort  Ellice  an 
j  hour  or  two  before  the  train,  and  just  in  time  to 
;  escape  a  thorough  wetting  in  a  heavy  thunder- 
storm. All  about  the  stockades  were  Indian 
lodges,  and  crowds  of  the  copper-colored  Hia- 
\yathas  came  out  to  see  us.  Villainous  Vermil- 
lion, lamp-black,  and  yellow-ochre  disfigured 
their  earthly  habitations  with  liideous  symbols, 
among  wliich  appeared  some  repulsive  represent- 
ations of  the  Deity;  and  Vermillion,  lamjj-black, 
and  yellow-ochre  disfigured  also  the  tenements  in 
which  their  half-starved  souls  were  housed.  The 
rain  fell  faster,  and  we  hurried  into  the  inclos- 
lu-e  of  the  fort,  gave  our  horses  to  one  of  the 
half-breed  attendants  standing  about,  and  car- 
ried our  saddle-bags  into  the  main  room  of  the 
house  occupied  by    the  trader  in   charge,  Mr. 
AVdliam    M'Kay.       He    soon    came    in,    drip- 
ping with  rain,  and  welcomed   his  unexpected 
guests  in  the  friendliest  way.     Disappearing  for 
a   few  moments  in   one   of   the   tamily   rooms 
which  opened  into  this  main  hall  on  either  side, 
he  presently  came  out  in  dry  clothes,  with  pipes 
and  tobacco— kinnic-kinnic   and   dried   winter- 
green  leaves  for   our  smoking  —  and   we  drew 
our  chairs  up  for  an  exchange  of  news  and  in- 
formation.    Presently  dinner  was  served,  and 
we  sat  dowTi  to  fresh  buffiUo-steaks,  hot  bread, 
rice-pudding,  strawberry-pie,  and  hyson  tea  well 
decocted.    The  table  was  of  plain  wood,  painted 
a  greenish-brown,  and  the  chairs— heavy  oak, 
high-backed,   and   substantial — were    made    by 
half-breeds,  and  the  Belgian  giant  might  have 
sat  upon  them  with  impunity.     The  hospitality 
with  which  we  were  entertained  here  was  one  of 
the  pleasantest  incidents  of  our  journey ;  and  it 
is  to  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company's  credit  that 
they  so  carefully  select  men  who  possess  both  the 
smtviter  in  motto  to  the  passing  traveler,  and  the 
iTojrai'iiferjniHorfo  to  scape-grace  Indians.    While 
we  were  at  dinner  one  of  Mr.  JI'Kay's  Indian 
retainers  sat  on  the  floor  in  the  adjoining  apart- 
ment, and  devoured  his  bnfFalo-steak  as  happily 
as  if  happy  to  sit  below  the  salt ;  and  his  half- 
breed  wife  waited  upon  her  lord's  guests  at  table. 
Mr.  M'Kay  was  born  in  the  country,  however, 
and  had  never  been  nearer  civilization  than  Red 
River,   his  father  liaving  served  the  Company 
before  him. 
The  Qu'Appelle,  or  Calling  River,  is  the 
principal  tributarj-  of  the  Assiniboine  River; 
which,  in  its  turn,  is  the  princijial  tributary 
of  Red  River.  It  enters  from  the  west,  a  few- 
miles  above  the  great  south  bend  of  the  Assini- 
boine, and  just  at  Fort  Ellice.  It  is  the  river 
whose  head-waters  are  linked  to  the  head-waters 
of  a  considerable  tributary  of  the  great  Saskat- 
chewan ;  and  an  English  engineer  has  proposed  to 
dig  a  canal  connecting  the  two,  in  order  to  turn 
the  waters  of  the  south  branch  of  the  Saskat- 
chewan into  the  Qu'Appelle  and  Assiniboine, 
so  enlarging  those  streams  as  to  make  them  nav- 
igable at  all  seasons  of  the  year ;  and  thus,  by 
avoiding  the  great  rapids  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Saskatchewan,  to  create  a  shorter,  straighter. 
and  unobstructed  channel  from  Rod  River  Settle- 
ment to  the  foot  of  the  Rocky  Mountains.  The 
cut  would  certainly  not  be  so  expensive  as  the 
Erie  Canal ;  and  wlieu  the  inducements  are  as 
great  as  those  which  aided  that  pi'oject,  doubt- 
less another  De  Witt  Clinton  will  be  born. 
We  staid  for  several  days  at  the  fort ;  and 
one  of  our  day's  tramps  in  the  vicinity  was  to 
the  junction  of  the  Qu'Appelle  and  the  Assini- 
boine— a  view  worth  all  the  work  it  cost  us. 
For  three  or  four  miles  we  followed  the  wind- 
ing trail  through  beautiful  groves,  here  and  there 
broken  up  by  lakes  and  ponds  covered  with  ducks, 
and  at  last  came  to  a  long  descent  through  a 
magnificent  forest  of  poplars.  The  daylight  was 
sifted  through  the  dense  foliage  overhead  into 
cool  shadows,  and  on  every  side  the  beautiful 
gray  trunks  environed  us,  shuttingout  all  glimps- 
jvs(mtm  OF  THE  AmimwtinR  anj>  hv  m-i'ihaa:  aivL'jy*. 
cs  of  the  OHtfir  world.  At  every  few  rods  wc 
Bcarc/l  away  a  flor'k  of  jiiKCons  that  went  whir- 
ring tliroiigli  tin;  leaves  an<l  liranches.  At  the 
foot  of  the  hhifl"  was  the  Qu'Appelle,  whieh  we 
struck  a  mile  or  two  from  its  month.  Tying  the 
horses,  wc  paildl&l  over  on  a  few  planks  lofjsely 
tinkered  together,  and  pnshing  through  the  for- 
est, whieh  nearly  eovered  the  hottom  land,  came 
at  la-stin  full  viewofaBplcndid  hluff,  higher  than 
Bunker  Hill  .Monument,  and  looking  like  a  huge 
fortification  which  Milton's  angels  might  have 
built  after  the  great  combat.  There  is  nothing 
at  the  East  like  the  grand  view  from  this  high 
bluff.  Wc  could  trace  the  windings  of  either 
river  by  the  giant  embankments  which  confined 
their  waters.  Here  and  there  we  beheld  broad 
stretches  of  water  where  it  widened  out,  sweej>- 
ing  broadly  and  indolently  around  some  project- 
ing point,  or  caught  brilliant  glimpses  of  its  nar- 
rower channels  through  the  thick  green  trcf^-tojis 
which  wc  ovcrlwjked.  Far  <iff  to  either  horizon 
the  gorge  winds  hither  and  thither,  the  near  bluffs 
flanked  successively  by  the  more  distant  ones,  a 
deeper  c/ilor  or  a  dimmer  haze  indicating  the 
junction  of  some  tributary  stream,  the  vast  ex- 
panse of  green  tree-tops  checkered  by  the  shad- 
ows of  passing  clouds.  An  eagle  drifted  ilown  the 
air  miles  away,  and  flocks  of  pigeons  were  wing- 
ing their  short  swift  flights  from  the  summit  of 
one  [lOplar  grove  to  another,  in  their  flight  over- 
looking all  this  wide  expanse,  and  then  sudden- 
ly sinking  through  the  leaves  out  of  the  warm 
air  and  bright  heaven  of  sunlight  into  the  cool 
sliadows  of  the  forest. 
The  jifjint  wirere  the  rivers  met  was  in  the 
low  bottom  land  lx;tween  the  bluffs,  three  miles 
away  from  where  we  stood,  and  aft<;r  wandering 
about  the  bluffs  for  miles  uji  and  down  to  get 
the  finest  views,  we  laid  our  course  for  that. 
Through  sand  jjlains,  wherean  Indian  had  trudged 
along  Ixifore  us,  digging  with  his  ti[>»ini-stick, 
and  leaving  the  track  of  his  mwcasins  with  Iocs 
turned  in,  one  foot  straight  before  the  other,  wo 
laboriously  phxlded.  Little  spires  of  grass,  two 
or  three  spears  in  each,  came  up  through  the 
sand,  and  around  eveiy  one  circles  were  traced, 
where  the  wind,  sweeping  through  the  hollow, 
hiul  ticnt  their  tijis  to  the  grotmd — circles  as  per- 
fect as  tlic  Italian  drew  and  thought  it  proved  he 
could  build  a  cathedral.  Between  the  clumps 
of  j>f)|<lar,  further  on,  wir  fiath  was  pavwl  with 
a  more  beautiful  Mosaic  than  any  in  cathedral 
aisles.  The  lines  were  drawn  in  the  deepest 
green,  vines  of  running  cedar,  and  the  inter- 
spaces filled  with  an  elastic  carpet  of  grayish  red 
sand  or  a  pale  gray  moss  of  the  loveliest  tint. 
Wading  then  through  si.x  or  eight  hundred  yards 
of  marsh-rushes  high  as  our  shoulders,  and  then 
plunging  into  and  through  a  half  mile  of  the 
thickest  underbrush,  stumbling  over  fallen  trees, 
and  tearing  our  corduroys  among  the  dense  and 
tangled  thorn-brakes  ivhere  was  scarcely  a  square 
foot  of  empty  air,  suddenly  we  came"  upon  the 
point  of  land  which  marked  the  junction  of  the 
rivers.  Indians  in  their  canoes  and  traders  in 
their  batteaux  have  passed  it  many  times ;  but 
not  this  century-  has  it  been  seen  from  that  point, 
surely,  by  any  other  eyes  than  ours. 
The  bank  wliere  we  stood  was  nearly  perpen- 
dicular,  the  tree  roots  projecting  its  top  ten  feet  I 
above  the  water.  Oiiposite,  the  bank  was  of  shelv- 
ing sand.  There  was  as  much  water  in  the  As- 
siniboine  above  the  junction  as  in  the  Minnesota 
at  the  same  season  of  the  year.  The  sand-banks 
and  bars,  strewn  with  broken  fragments  of  trees 
and  other  debris,  and  the  concavities  in  the  low 
banks,  proved  the  recurrence  of  spring  overflows. 
Both  the  Assiniboine  and  the  Qu'AiJijelle  were 
tahtino  with  the  dootor. 
turbid,  but  not  so  much  so  as  Red  River.     The 
Assiniboine  had  the  lightest  and  swiftest  cun'ent. 
the  Qu'Appelle  the  largest  and  dficjiest. 
Returning  to  camj)  by  the  cool  purple  light  of 
a  sunset  sky,  we  heard  as  we  neared  the  tents, 
which  were  pitched  half  a  mile  from  the  fort.' 
j  tlie  Indians  who  were  camped  about  the  stockl 
I  ades,  singing,  beating  their  drums,  and  dancing 
the  war-dance.     They  were  a  small  war-party 
just  returned  from   an  expedition  against  the 
Sioux,  and  brought  hack  as  their  trophies  a  scalp 
dried  and  stretched  upon  a  hoop  and  a  human 
hand.   Their  monotonous  thumps  upon  the  drums 
divided  and  measured  the  silence,  and  presently 
the  hideous  chanting  of  the  men,  alternating  with 
the  softer  antiphone  of  the  women  and  children, 
broke  upon  the  air.    As  we  approached  the  fort 
the  scene  was  more  plainly  visible.     The  red 
camp-fire  lighted  up  their  skin  lodges  and  the 
tall  stockades,  and  made  more  impenetrable  the 
thick    darkness  of  the    ravine    through  which 
Beaver  Creek  ran,  nearly  two  hundred  feet  be- 
low.   This  scalp  dance  thev  keep  n\,  for  the  vic- 
tory with  foces  joyfully  black,  evorv  night  and 
morning  till  the  snow  falls,  the  women  joining 
the  dance,  and  the  little  children,  naked  coppers 
that  can  barely  tod- 
dle,  taught   to  whet 
their   puny   passions 
into  the  fierceness  of 
adult   hate    and    re- 
venge   as    faithfully 
as  we  teach  the  lit- 
tle  ones  we  love  to 
fold  their  hands,  close 
their  eyes,  and  prav 
night    and    morning 
to   "Our   Father   in 
licaven."     A  woman 
danced  and  beat  with 
her  hands  this  fresh 
scalp,    and    a    little 
child  mocked  its  eld- 
ers with   the   bloody 
white  hand  dangling 
from  its  neck. 
The  Indians  pass- 
ed their  days  in  gam- 
bling maiidy,  the 
squaws  in  making 
moccasins.  At  the 
risk  of  adding  to  our 
traveling  population 
we  passed  an  after- 
noon in  their  lodges, 
introducing  ourselves 
to  their  good  graces 
with  tobacco.  In  one 
tent  a  dozen  of  the 
dirty  tribe  were  play- 
ing poker  with  greasy 
cards ;  bullets  the 
stakes.  A  wrinkled 
old  hag  joined  them, 
as  loud-mouthed  cer- 
tainly, and  as  filthy 
I 
of  manner  and  speech — so  our  interpreter  said 
— as  any  of  tliem.  In  another  lodge  two  of  t!ie 
women  were  sowing  moccasins  and  ])hn'ing  with 
their  bahies  triced  up  in  their  standing  cradles. 
The  men  dawdled  or  jilayed  cards,  and  raced 
horses,  or  set  their  dogs  on  a  young  bulialo- 
heifer  owned  at  the  fort,  or  hung  around  our 
tents  watching  all  our  motions,  and  trying  to 
get  a  chance  to  steal  even  an  old  nail ;  the  wo- 
men only  worked.  And  whoever  undertakes 
the  civilization  of  these  savages  must  begin  with 
the  women,  if  he  would  ever  see  any  fruit  of 
his  labors. 
Dr.  C.  L.  Anderson,  our  geologist  and  botan- 
ist, left  us  here  to  descend  the  Assiniboine  to  Fort 
Garry  in  a  birch  canoe,  with  a  single  Indian 
guide,  who  could  not  speak  a  word  of  English. 
Two  of  us  carried  his  canoe  and  traps  in  a  wagon 
down  to  the  river  where  he  was  to  begin  his 
journey,  and  saw  him  safely  loaded  and  em- 
barked. The  Doctor  had  been  our  consulting 
scientific  dictionary  ;  and  we  regretted  only  the 
loss  of  his  society  more  than  the  privation  of 
looking  upon  nature,  bays  and  breezes,  rocks, 
strata,  alluvial  deposits,  temperatures,  isother- 
mals  and  plants,  cryptogamous  and  other,  alone, 
and  with  very  unscientific  eyes.  Besides,  he  took 
his  microscope  away  with  him,  and  so  shut  up 
the  door  to  one  of  our  two  Infinites,  though,  to 
be  sure,  it  didn't  require  a  microscope  to  unvail 
the  infinite  littleness  of  some  things  which  he 
left  behind  him.  Lacking  a  shoe  to  throw  after 
the  Doctor  for  luck,  Joseph  took  the  biggest  of 
two  figliting  dogs  that  had  followed  our  wagon 
:ind  pitched  him  into  the  middle  of  the  river  as 
ihe  Indian  paddled  away  down  the  stream,  his 
charge  hardly  daring  to  look  over  his  shoulder 
for  fear  of  upsetting  the  canoe. 
The  same  day  our  party  broke  up.  The  Fra- 
ser  River  boys  had  quite  completed  their  outfits, 
and  supplied  the  place  of  the  leader  of  the  ex- 
pedition, who  declined  to  go  any  finther  with 
them,  with  a  guide  familiar  with  the  country,  and 
who  promised  to  put  them  well  on  their  way  for 
the  Kootonais  Pass  before  leaving  them. 
Joseph,  whom  they  all  loved,  went  on  a  few 
miles  with  them,  and  we  who  were  now  on  our 
return  journey,  had  to  cut  sticks  and  leave  them 
in  the  trail  slanting  the  way  we  had  gone — an 
aid  to  the  pilgrim's  progress,  which  he  stoutly 
resented  when  he  caught  up  with  us  at  night- 
fall. There  is  no  report  e.xtant  of  those  parting 
moments ;  but  it  has  been  conjectured  that  Jo- 
seph made  them  an  afi'ecting  s])eech,  in  which 
it  is  to  be  hoped  he  dilated  upon  the  superiority 
of  instinct  over  the  mariner's  compass  for  the 
purposes  of  northwest  explorers,  and  the  great 
advantage  to  be  gained  in  the  long-run  by  mak- 
ing mules  and  horses  travel  in  the  summer  months 
eight  hours  continuously,  through  the  heat  of  the 
day,  instead  of  in  the  cool  of  the  morning  and 
evening.  If  he  did  not,  then  the  "frightful  ex- 
ample" which  we  carried  with  us  all  summer 
failed  to  teach  its  proper  lesson.  One  thing  is 
certain,  the  little  blue  and  gold  copy  of  Bryant's 
Poems  which  had  consoled  us  so  far  he  gave  to 
one  of  the  emigrants,  and  if  he  keeps  up  his  old 
habits  of  spouting,  it  is  quite  likely  to  prove  un- 
true that  the  "  Oregon  hears  no  sound  save  his 
own  dashings." 
Our  leader  here  traded  oif  the  tent,  which  sev- 
eral of  the  party  had  helped  him  to  buy,  for  a 
young  Buffalo  cow,  henceforth  the  companion  of 
our  journeyings.  Our  share  in  the  cow  was  the 
amusement  her  antics  afibrdcd  us,  and  the  pleas- 
m-e  we  enjoyed  in  having  our  daily  rate  of  travel 
slackened  for  her  benefit,  about  twenty  per  cent. 
"  Jessie" — for  that  was  her  name — had  an  indis- 
position to  keep  her  nose  at  a  fixed  distance  from 
the  ground,  and  also  objected  to  having  the  chain, 
which  held  her  to  the  tail-board  of  the  Colonel's 
wagon,  in  contact  with  her  bare  skull.  So  on  the 
first  Sunday  after  leaving  Fort  Ellice  we  halted 
all  day,  and  the  great  buffalo  tamer  constructetl 
a  pair  of  tongs  and  a  ring,  which,  with  infinite 
labor,  he  at  last  succeeded  in  getting  into  the 
cow's  nose.  She  could  not  stand  as  much  pull- 
ing on  her  Schneiderian  membrane  as  upon  her 
horns,  and  so  was  more  tractable  ;  but  now  and 
then  she  would  butt  the  heavy  loaded  wagon  out 
of  the  ruts  with  tremendous  vigor,  or,  getting 
down  on  Iter  knees,  tojiple  it  over,  or  lie  down 
herself  and  be  pulled  along  by  horns  and  nose  in 
a  shocking  way.  A  little  colt,  that  was  under 
the  protection  of  Joe  and  his  mare,  soon  lost  its 
first  awe  of  the  strange  mo/istor,  and  came  to  a 
realizing  sense  of  the  tact  that  the  cow  could  not 
chase  him  very  far,  whatever  her  pretensions ;  and 
it  was  his  especial  delight  to  come  gallo])ing  up 
at  full  speed  behind  the  cow,  and,  wheeling  with- 
in safe  limits,  kick  up  his  heels  .at  poor  "  Jessie," 
who,  whether  frightened  or  tormented,  generally 
made  the  Colonel's  seat  an  uneasy  one  for  a  few- 
moments  after. 
The  first  day  out  we  met  a  small  party  of  plain 
hunters  who  re])orted  twenty  Sioux  at  Turtle 
Mountain,  and  one  brigade  of  hunters  returned 
to  White  Horse  Plains.  Of  course  we  kept  a 
closer  watch,  though  the  event  proved  it  need- 
less. 
The  blue,  timber-skirted  line  of  the  Assini- 
boine was  visible  on  our  left  for  a  day  or  two,  and 
we  crossed  two  of  its  small  tributary  streams  in 
the  first  and  second  days'  journey.  The  coun- 
try had  the  same  general  character  as  that  be- 
fore described — a  little  more  marshy,  perhaps, 
but  the  same  slightly  rolling  jjrairie  land,  with 
here  and  there  ])oplar  groves.  Three  or  four  days 
after  leaving  Fort  Ellice,  we  noticed  several  prai- 
rie-fires on  the  horizon,  and  ])rescntly  came  upon 
the  fresh  tracks  of  Indians.  They  could  hardly 
have  been  two  hours  before  us,  but  fortunately 
our  paths  coincided  only  a  little  way. 
On  Wednesday,  the  1 7th  of  Augtist,  about  noon, 
we  came  upon  our  own  old  trail,  by  which  we 
had  gone  needlessly  so  much  to  the  west  of  Fort 
Ellice ;  then  we  were  twenty,  now  but  five. 
Following  it  backward,  wenooned  at  a  beautiful 
spot,  between  the  range  of  sand-hills  of  which 
I  have  before  sjioken  and  a  lake,  where  we  had 
had  a  strawberry  feast  twelve  days  before.  Not 
a  berry  remained.     Leaving  here  the  Moosehead 
;sr* 
FOBDINO   AT   TUK   SAND-HILLS. 
Mountain  and  Fort  Gariy  trail  for  tlic  ojicn  coun- 
try, we  traveled  on,  and  before  ni;;litfall  struck 
the  Turtle  Mountain  trail,  choosin;^  a  camp- 
ground just  beyond  Calumet  or  i^ipe  River  (a 
tributary  of  tbe  Assiniboine),  whicli  at  tliig  point 
was  forty  feet  wide  and  about  four  feet  deep. 
Eight  or  ten  miles  from  this  caniijinp-ground 
was  Mouse  River.  On  the  north  side  of  it  were 
lii(;h  sand-hills,  some  of  them  wooded  to  the  to]), 
and  from  tlieir  summits  we  had  a  magnificent 
view  of  the  country  in  every  direction. 
These  hills  are  a  favorite  camping-ground  of 
the  plain  hunters.  Deep,  w-ell-worn  trails  con- 
verge here  from  every  direction,  and  tlio  prairie, 
at  the  fiiot  of  the  hills,  is  covered  witli  llie  debris 
of  old  encampments,  broken  bullalo-bones,  tufts 
of  hair,  frames  for  drying  the  meat  jireparatory 
to  powdering  it  for  pemmican,  old  moccasins, 
strips  of  calico,  broken  lodge  poles,  fragments 
of  blue  crockery  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company 
pattern,  and  fire  holes  were  dug  in  the  earth  at 
convenient  intervals. 
Fording  the  river  in  some  rapids,  where  the 
water  was  about  one  hundred  feet  wide  and  from 
four  to  six  feet  deep,  and  pressing  through  tlic 
thick  willow  clumps  and  the  oak  groves  which 
skirt  the  banks  of  the  rim  of  the  stream,  we 
camped  in  a  little  hollow  near  the  river  where 
the  ground  was  relieved  against  the  sky  within 
gunshot  on  every  side  except  that  toward  the 
river. 
Wliile  Joe  was  curing  his  lunacy  by  rigging 
■'his  masters"  a  mosquito  net,  Michelle  and  I 
rigged  a  couple  of  poles,  and  went  for  a  string  of 
lish.     We  caught  a  fine  mess  of  white-fish,  and, 
for  aught  I  know,  might  have  continued  adding 
to  the  string  till  now.  They  bit  very  freely,  and 
played  splendidly.  The  meat  was  not  unlike 
that  of  Connecticut  River  shad,  though,  if  possi- 
ble, more  delicate,  with  fewer  bones.  The  eagles 
and  fisli-hawks  envied  us  our  sport ;  for  several 
of  them  circled  in  tlie  air  over  our  heads,  and 
when  we  lauded  our  i)rey,  they  often  swoo])ed  low 
enough  for  us  to  have  struck  them  with  our  lance- 
wood  tips. 
From  this  time  till  we  reached  Pembina  Mount- 
ain, Michelle  and  Joe  lived  in  constant  fear  of 
an  attack  of  the  Sion.x,  and  the  former  always 
(diose  a  cainping-groimd  protected  like  the  pres- 
ent one.  For  ourselves  we  had  little  fear,  tliough 
we  kejit  a  careful  watcli ;  for  we  knew  that  all 
the  warriors  of  that  tribe  had  gone  further  south 
to  a  great  treaty-making  with  our  Indian  agent.s, 
and  for  a  few  weeks  our  line  of  travel,  however 
dangerous  at  any  other  time,  was  quite  safe  to  a 
well-armed  party  like  ours. 
We  had  now  entered  upon  the  great  buffalo 
ranges,  and  had  not  traveled  ten  miles  befoi'e  we 
saw  a  few  bulls,  six  or  eight  miles  to  the  east.  I 
mounted  Dan  Rice  and  trotted  slowly  off  in  their 
direction,  ho]nng  to  turn  them  toward  the  train, 
which  kept  steadily  on  its  way.  But  while  mak- 
ing my  waythrougli  a  )jiece  of  low  marshy  grinmd 
tliey  got  out  of  sight.  Returning  to  the  trail  I 
met  Josej^h,  who  had  remained  behind  to  write 
up  his  journal.  As  we  drew  nearer  to  the  train 
we  saw  the  Colonel  mount  Fireaw.ay,  and  canter 
off  at  a  lively  rate  to  the  east,  beckoning  us  to 
follow  him.  We  put  spurs  to  our  horses  and 
galloped  on.      He  had  seen  a  bull  and  calf  de- 
} 
scending  into  a  deep  coul'ic  for  water,  and  follow- 
ing his  directions,  we  beat  it  up  for  a  few  rods, 
until  we  met  him  returning  from  the  opposite 
direction.  While  we  stood  there  wondering  what 
had  become  of  the  creatures,  they  broke  cover  far 
beyond  us,  and  started  over  the  prairie  at  a  steady 
gallop,  the  calf  taking  the  lead.  We  all  joined 
the  chase,  though  the  prairie  was  full  of  badger- 
holes  and  the  game  small.  The  excitement 
and  the  hope  of  a  good  supper  were  too  much 
to  resist.  Fireaway's  tremendous  leaps  soon 
took  him  outside  the  animals  and  turned  them 
toward  us.  By  skillful  riding  the  Colonel  sepa- 
rated the  calf,  which  ran  like  a  yonng  antelope, 
from  the  old  bull,  and,  with  one  well-directed 
shot,  which  broke  his  li.ack-bone  just  behind  the 
skull,  tumbled  him  to  the  ground,  dead. 
The  old  bull  gallojied  aw.ay ;  but  in  the  course 
of  the  afternoon  the  train  came  up  to  where  he 
had  halted,  and  Joseph,  mounted  on  his  light 
pony.  Lady  Jane,  made  a  beautiful  chase,  and 
shot  the  fellow  not  ten  rods  from  the  trail.  It 
was  a  barren  triumph  for  Joseph,  however ;  for 
the  monster,  though  he  had  run  so  well  and  died 
game,  had  a  hind-leg  stitF  with  spavin,  and  be- 
sides had  been  badly  gored,  so  that  nothing  of 
him  was  fit  to  eat  save  the  tongue,  which  he 
would  have  spared  to  have  kept  Michelle's  un- 
ruly member  from  wagging— Michelle,  who  knew 
a  lame  buffalo  from  a  well  one  a  thousand  miles 
away. 
Michelle  dissected  the  calf  with  a  dexterity 
which,  if  employed  upon  a  human  subject,  would 
have  insured  him  a  Wood  prize  at  the  Bellevue 
Hospital,  and  for  two  days  our  larder  was  full. 
Traveling   as   we  were   witliout    a    trail,   the 
mariner's  compass  and  the  primitive  intuitions 
of  our  leader  again  came  in  conflict.     As  it  hni)- 
pened  the  latter  conquered  for  a  time,  and  so 
we  were  secured  a  visit  to  the  groat  south  bend 
of  Mouse  River  and  the  Hare  mountains,  which, 
if  we  had  followed  Michelle's  instructions  and 
taken   a   bee-line  from   Fort   EUice   to   Turtle 
Mountain,  we  should  never  have  seen.     On  the 
afternoon  of  the   19th,  as  we  were  journeying 
slowly  along,   Jessie,   the  buffalo-cow,  trotting 
comfortably   behind   the  Colonel's  wagon,  Joe 
bringing  up  the  carts,  Joseph   and   I  jogging 
along  on  our  horses ;  and  Michelle  far  ahead  on 
foot  with  his  rifle,  keeping  to  his  direction  of 
"south  60°  east"  around  and  ever  hills,  down 
valleys  and  through  marshes,  as  steadily  as  if 
electric  currents  had  polarized  him  into  perpetual 
fealty  to  that  point  of  the  compass,  we  began  to 
discern  from  the  high  points  of  land  high  ridges 
at  the  east  which  seemed  gradually  rising  higher 
and   higher  in  a  line  about  parallel  with  our 
course.      These  grew  to  mountains  (or  what  are 
called  such,  in  the  absence  of  larger  sjiecimens) 
the  next  day.     Joe,  who  had  sworn  to  us  that 
he  had  wintered  at  Turtle  Mountain,  thought  it 
was  that  veritable  peak  which  we  now  saw,  al- 
though so  much  farther  to  the  east  than  we  had 
expected.      Michelle  preserved  a  discreet  non- 
commitalism,  asserting  that  from  one  point  of 
^'iew  it  did  look  like  Turtle  Mountain,  and  then 
again  it  didn't.     His  defense  of  his  own  remem- 
brances had  succeeded  so  poorly  against  primi- 
tive instincts  in  another  case  that  he  was  not 
disposed  to  say  too  much.     The  Colonel  con- 
SOUTH  BEND  OF  MOUSE  ErVEB. 
eluded  that  it  was  Turtle  Mountnin,  and  that 
he  had  all  along  been  in  the  right  in  urging 
Michelle  to  keep  a  course  further  to  the  east. 
So  the  train  was  turned  to  the  north  of  east,  and 
we  jnished  straight  for  the  highest  peak.  By 
the  middle  of  the  afternoon  we  were  near  enough 
to  see  that  a  river  and  wide  bottom  lands  inter- 
vened, and  a  half  hour's  steady  canter  brought 
us  to  the  great  South  Bend  of  Mouse  River. 
We  camped  at  the  summit  of  one  of  the 
bluffs  overlooking  the  bend,  protected  on  the 
south  also  by  a  steep  ravine,  down  which  a  little 
stream,  that  was  almost  a  torrent,  tore  its  way  to 
the  more  secret  places  in  the  valley,  where  we 
could  sit  and  watch  the  deer  and  antelopes  as 
they  came  to  drink. 
On  Sunday  two  or  three  of  us  crossed  the  great 
plateau,  ascended  Hare  Jlountain,  and  from  its 
cold,  windy  top  saw,  aivay  to  the  south,  the  long 
blue  line  of  Turtle  Mountain,  made  known  to 
us,  beyond  a  doubt,  by  the  two  blue  and  rounded 
arches  rising  out  of  it.  Pembina  Mountain,  the 
course  of  Mouse  River,  our  first  fording-place 
by  the  sloping  plateau,  our  second  crossing- 
place  near  the  sand-hills,  Moosehead  Mountain, 
Prospect  Hill,  and  the  fointer  blue  of  the  Assini- 
boine  hills  were  all  visible  within  the  circle  of 
the  horizon;  while  for  to  the  south,  but  full  in 
sight,  arose  the  clear  blue  line  of  the  long-desired 
Turtle  Mountain,  crowned  with  its  double  peaks. 
The  day  ended  in  rain.  Joseph  and  the 
Colonel  had  returned  to  camp,  leaving  me  with 
my  sketch-book,  Dan  Rice,  and  rifle.  A  huge 
drop  on  the  paper-pad  was  the  first  warning 
that  the  storm  threatened  all  day  had  really 
come.  Galloping  to  a  grove  of  oaks,  I  kept  dry 
under  the  trees  and  waited  some  hours  for  the 
rain  to  hold  up ;  but  the  end  was  not  yet.  It 
was  obviously  inconvenient  to  remain  there  all 
night,  and  so  a  couple  of  hours  before  sunset  I 
mounted  Dan  and  set  off  for  the  camp. 
We  had  to  cross  two  small  streams,  and  Dan 
desired  to  be  excused  from  jumjiing  from  bank 
to  bank,  and  so  we  spent  a  drenching  hour  search- 
ing up  and  down  the  banks  for  a  place  where 
he  could  descend  gradually  to  the  water.  This 
fairly  accomplished,  we  soon  came  to  the  foot  of 
the  great  bluff  on  the  top  of  which  the  train  was 
encamped.  Along  its  foot  ran  another  stream, 
wooded  for  a  quarter  of  a  mile  on  either  bank, 
and  fordable  in  but  one  or  two  places. 
In  spite  of  the  flapping  leaves,  the  bedraggling 
boughs,  the  stumps  in  the  way,  the  swamps  in 
which  Dan  twenty  times  was  bogged  and  lost 
two  shoes,  and  the  discouraging  process  of  break- 
ing a  way  to  three  different  but  alike  unfordable 
places  in  the  stream,  at  last  I  made  my  own 
way  on  foot  through  the  underbrnsh  to  the 
stream,  first  tying  Dan  outside  the  wood,  and 
then,  by  wading  down  stream,  at  last  found  a 
place  where  the  bank  shelved  snfiiciently,  and 
the  trees  were  few  enough,  to  permit  a  horse's 
approach  and  crossing ;  and  from  this  spot  final- 
ly found  a  road  to  Dan,  trusting  to  Providence 
to  be  able  to  get  from  the  stream  through  the 
woods  on  the  other  side  and  so  to  camp. 
There  tlie  Colonel  was  asleep  inside  his  covered 
wagon,  with  which  he  had  supplied  the  place  of 
our  tent — the  only  dry  place  within  five  hun- 
dred,miles — and  the  two  half-breeds  were  hud- 
dling under  the  carts.  Self-sacrificing  Joseph 
was  rolled  up  in  a  heap  of  blankets,  over  which 
he  had  pathetically  stretched  our  mosquito-net, 
and  there  he  sat  smoking  a  pipe,  watching  the 
streams  running  through  the  top  and  down  its 
sides,  and  discoursing  to  himself  upon  the  muta- 
bility of  all  human  aff\iirs  —  especiallv.  tents. 
Joseph  gave  me  the  half  of  his  blankets,  only 
stipulating  that  I  should  .strip  till  I  came  to  a 
dry  surface.  We  divided  our  last  morsel,  a  cold 
bufi'alo-tongue,  and  then  submitted  to  the  rain 
for  the  rest  of  the  day,  all  night,  and  the  next 
morning  till  nearly  noon,  by  whicli  time  we  were 
cuddling  up  together  under  the  portion  of  the 
blanket  yet  preserved  from  the  rain,  which  was 
a  piece  in  its  centre  about  the  size  of  a  half- 
dollar. 
When  the  sun  came  out  overhead  at  noon, 
and  the  rain  ceased  enough  for  us  to  light  a  fire 
and  fry  pancakes,  hap]jier  mortals  were  never 
seen,  the  storm  having  demonstrated  in  British 
America  the  same  truth  as  the  pain  in  Socrates's 
shin,  in  old  Greece,  just  before  he  drank  hem- 
lock and  began  his  immort.ality. 
The  next  day  we  crossed  another  half-breed's 
trail  from  Fort  Garry  to  White  Horse  Plains, 
and  numberless  buftalo  trails  besides.  These 
are  wide  and  deep  single  tracks  worn  by  the 
hoofs  of  buffalo,  which,  when  migrating  in  small 
herds,  if  undisturbed,  and  if  not  feeding,  always 
travel  in  single  file.  The  marsh  grass,  into 
which  they  had  gone  for  water,  was  trodden 
down,  the  dung  was  fresh,  the  tracks  recent, 
and  the  places  numerous  where  they  had  torn 
away  the  grass  with  their  hoofs  and  rolled  in 
the  dirt  to  dislodge  the  flies.  The  reddish  pur- 
ple arch  of  Turtle  Mountain  was  visible  to  us 
through  the  summer  haze  all  the  afternoon, 
rising  higher  and  higher,  the  trees  upon  its 
sides  hourly  becoming  more  distinct,  resolving 
themselves  first  into  clumps  and  groves,  then 
into  single  trees.  The  next  day  we  reached  it. 
Turtle  Mountain  is  only  a  high  range  of 
hills,  heavily  timbered,  with  beautiful  prairies 
here  and  there  dotted  with  groves  stretching 
away  from  it  on  every  side.  It  takes  its  name, 
of  course,  from  its  peculiar  outline  as  it  rises  uji 
out  of  the  prairie.  Its  general  direction  is  north 
and  south,  with  a  deflection  of  the  lower  end. 
eastward,  from  25°  to  30°.  After  passing  this 
lower  end  we  had  a  better  though  distant  view 
of  its  highest  Imllp,  the  one  whose  blue  crown 
we  had  seen  from  the  top  of  Hare  Mountain, 
overtopping  all  tlie  surrounding  range.  This, 
our  half-breeds  told  us,  rises  more  perjiendicu- 
larly  from  the  prairie,  and  is  diflicult  of  ascent. 
Riding  along  with  Michelle  the  next  morning, 
half  a  mile  ahead  of  the  train,  we  caught  sight 
of  two  buffalo  bulls  quietly  feeding  on  a  green 
slope  near  a  marsh  a  mile  or  two  to  the  south- 
east. Our  horses  were  tired  with  months  of 
continuous  travel,  unfit  to  run,  and,  to  tell  the 
i 
truth,  I  always  ilc»|jaired  of  seeing  Dan  Hicc 
equal  his  first  exploit. 
But  our  supply  of  meat  wa«  entirely  exhaust- 
ed, and  of  tallow  tfx>,  which  is  to  the  prairie  trav- 
eler butter,  lard,  and  whatever  else  tliat  is  nec- 
essary in  cofjking  and  unctuous  in  nature.  Sfj 
as  we  came  nejirer  the  two  buffalo  I  spurred 
ahead  of  old  .Miihelle,  taking  the  left-hand  val- 
leys, where  my  horse  and  I  were  hid  from  sight. 
Michelle  waited  the  result  just  back  of  the  brow 
•if  a  hill. 
Galloping  on  half  a  mile,  I  thought  the  valley 
Iwtween  us  not  too  wide  for  a  long  rifle  shot,  and 
■lismounting,  went  to  the  summit  of  the  hill. 
One  of  the  bulls  had  lain  down,  his  back  turned 
toward  me,  and  so  no  good  shot  was  possible ; 
and  the  other  was  just  over  the  farther  slope  of 
the  hill,  kicking  up  his  heels  in  the  air,  and 
-•rushing  to  pulp  the  flies  that  tormented  him. 
There  was  no  alternative  but  to  ride  to  the  next 
hill,  a  quarter  of  a  mile  beyond.  For  two  or 
three  minutes  horse  and  rider  were  in  full  sight, 
if  they  had  turned  their  heads  to  see ;  but  they 
did  not,  and  in  an  instant  more  we  were  hidden 
by  the  hill.  Here  I  dismounted  again,  untied 
the  lariat  from  the  saddle-bow,  leaving  it  to  trail 
under  the  horse's  feet  that  it  might  keep  him  in 
the  valley,  and  then  hastened  to  the  top  of  the 
hill.  The  bulls  were  still  there,  the  further  one 
quietly  feeding.  A  long  marsh  lay  Ixitween  us, 
empty  of  water  except  in  the  spring,  but  at  all 
seasons  full  of  long  thick  grass,  breast  high,  and 
the  whole  oval  fringed  with  a  golden  rim  of 
iiclianthus  —  the  flowers  growing  rarer  as  on 
the  slope  of  the  hills  the  color  of  the  grass  was 
changed  to  a  lighter  green  ;  and  here  and  there, 
in  the  circle,  stood  clum|>s  of  shrubber)-  like 
sentinels  guarding  the  tombs  of  departed  water- 
nymphs. 
My  weapon  was  the  same  Maynard  rifle 
spoken  of  before,  which  a  man  may  load  and 
fire  a  dozen  times  in  a  minute  if  he  be  quick  at 
taking  aim,  and  not  likely  to  be  made  nenous  by 
excitement  or  danger.  I  put  a  half-dozen  car- 
tridges in  my  hand,  and  set  the  primer,  which  pays 
out  tape  cajjs  as  fast  as  the  rifle  is  cocked,  and  be- 
gan the  approach.  I  might  have  fired  at  once 
upon  the  recumlient  bull — the  distance  was  not 
more  than  a  hundred  and  fifty  yards — but,  except 
concealed,  I  could  not  hope  to  get  the  other  bull, 
who  would  come  to  the  top  of  the  hill  to  recon- 
noitre, and,  seeing  me,  yjerhaps  get  away  without 
presenting  a  mark  for  a  fatal  shot.  So  crouch- 
ing below  the  level  of  the  tips  of  the  grass,  where 
it  was  high  enough,  or  running  stealthily  from 
clump  to  cluinj)  of  shrubljcry  large  enough  to 
keep  head  and  shoulders  out  of  sight,  in  a  quar- 
ter of  an  hour  I  had  got  within  twenty  yards  of 
the  nearest  bull— the  one  lying  down — and  was 
barely  concealed  behind  a  clump  of  decayed  pop- 
lar shrubs.  Tlie  other  bull  was  hid  behind  llie 
-well  of  the  hill.  The  wind,  I  ought  to  have 
<aid,  was  blowing  in  a  course  at  right  angles  to 
my  approach,  or  one  had  never  got  so  near ;  and 
had  their  strong  odor  come  between  the  wind 
and  my  nostrils.  I  might  have  taken  a  longer 
range.     One  instant  devoted  to  a  steady  hand 
and  to  a  synofwis  of  the  chances  of  jmrsuit  and 
the  means  of  escajje,  and  then  I  fired,  aiming 
at  his  heart  just  back  of  the  fore  shoulder.    Swift 
upim  the  crack  of  the  rifle,  liardly  distinguisha- 
ble from  it  save  by  a  quick  ear,  came  the  spat 
which  told  that  the  bullet  had  hit  the  mark,  and 
then,  before  the  bull  could  rise  to  his  feet,  the  red 
blood  showed  that  it   had  hit  a  fatal  sjjot.     I 
dropix^d  in  the  grass  behind  the  bush  instantly. 
The  shot  bull  rose  to  his  feet  slowly  and  pain- 
fully, and  looked  in  every  direction  but  the  right 
one   to   see  where   the   blow   had   come   from. 
Michelle  the  half-breed  mounted,  and  now  stand- 
ing on  the  summit  of  the  distant  hill,  drew  his 
gaze  for  a  moment,  and  then  he  turned  to 
escape   by   way  of  the   marsh   I   had   crossed, 
and   turning,  saw  me.     Too  weak   to  attack, 
he  turned  still  again  to  escape  from  the  near- 
est danger — slowly,  deliberately,  and  with  cvi- 
I  dent   j/ain  —  too   much   hurt   to   run.      As   he 
I  turned    I   took   a    quick    aim,    fired,    and    hit 
I  him  jiLst  over  the  kidneys,  in  the  hofje  of  break- 
ing his  back.     The  monster  stopjied,  shook  his 
shaggy  mane,  that  hung,  bbck  and  curling,  from 
,  his  jaw  to  his  knees,  walked  on  a  few  steps,  and 
could  go  no  further.     His  vast  bulk  heaved  with 
j  the  tremors  of  apprrjaching  death ;  but  I  could 
j  watch  him  no  longer  while  uncertain  what  the 
I  bull  just  over  the  hill  might  be  doing.     Hasten- 
;  ing  up  the  sIoik-,  I  caught  sight  of  him  standing 
and,  apparently,  gazing  at  the  distress  of  his 
companion.     He  had  not  taken  to  flight ;  for  it 
is  a  jK'Culiarity  of  this  sagacious  animal  that, 
till  they  know  from  what  quarter  danger  comes, 
they  will  not  run,   but  only   huddle  together, 
when  in  herds,  perhaps  the  bulls  circling  about 
the  cows  and  calves,  and  two  or  three  of  the 
older  and  larger  bulls  going  to  some  elevated 
jxjint  to  discover  the  direction  of  danger.    When 
only  two  or  three  are  together,  or  when  a  single 
bull  is  fired  upon  from  a  concealed  position,  they 
will  hardly  move  a  dozc-n  yards  till  they  know  in 
which  direction  it  is  safest  to  run.     As  this  bull 
stood  there,  partly  turned  from  me,  hump,  horns, 
and  jiart  of  the  shoulders  visible,  and  ears  and 
head  erect,  I  fired,  aiming  as  low  on  his  tide 
as   jKwsible,   yet  clearing   the  top  of  the  hill. 
Spat ! — came  back  the  sound  of  the  bullet  as  it 
hit  the  creature's  side,  quicker  than  the  echo  of 
the  rifle  from  the  nearest  hills,  and   then  the 
huge  "ugh"  as  it  tore  its  way  through  his  mus- 
cles and  lungs.     I  loaded  instantly,  and,  doing 
so,  caught  a  second's  glimpse  of  the  first  bull 
down  on  his  knees  and  just  turning  over.     As 
if  to  revenge  the  fall  of  his  companion,  or  by 
some  quick  instinct,  the  second  one  galloped  to- 
ward the  top  of  the  hill — not  thirty  yards  from 
me — swept  his  lion-like  head  around  to  the  spot 
where  I  stood — for  concealment  wag  no  longer 
possible — gazed  an  instant  with  his  large,  dark, 
ox-like  eyes,  flashing  fire  now,  and  then  rushed 
headlong  down  the  slope,  horns  low,  full  ujon 
me.     The  quick  rifle  .sjivcd  my  life.     Before  he 
had  made  a  dozen  leaps,  or  was  within  a  dozen 
yards  of  me,  it  sent  a  bullet  straight  between  his 
GOLGOTHA. 
eyes  into  the  huge  mat  of  black  and  curling  hair 
that  covered  his  skull.  Tlie  bullet  would  have 
leaped  a  thousand  3'ards  of  enijitv  air  quicker 
than  a  leaf  falls ;  but  as  for  killing  him,  it  might 
as  well  have  struck  a  rock.  It  staggered  him 
though,  and,  as  I  sav,  saved  my  life;  for  I 
'■ould  not  have  loaded  again  before  he  would 
liave  had  me  on  his  horns,  do  tlie  best  I  might. 
He  turned  in  his  course,  as  if  a  little  dizzy,  and 
not  certain  of  his  sight ;  rushed  by  with  leaps 
that  shook  the  ground — not  a  yard  from  mv 
4de— but  soon  stopped,  breathing  hard.  The 
lirst  shot  was  beginning  to  take  eft'ect.  He  walk- 
ed slowly  away  as  I  loaded,  sometimes  gallop- 
ing a  few  yards,  and  then  staggering  into  a  walk. 
Obeying  the  law  of  parsimony,  I  would  not  fire 
another  shot,  expecting  every  moment  to  see 
him  drop,  hut  followed  on  slowly  behind.  As 
I  reached  the  top  of  a  hill  that  "had  hid  him  a 
moment  from  my  sight,  I  saw  that  he  was  re- 
newing his  speed,  and  was  already  two  hundred 
yards  away,  and  might  travel  a  mile  or  two  yet 
away  from  the  trail  of  the  train,  for  such  luige 
creatures  a.s  these  take  a  great  deal  of  killing. 
He  turned  to  look  for  his  pursuer,  and  thus  gave 
me  a  good  mark.  I  fired.  Bang!  spat! — that 
same  peculiar  sound ;  and  for  the  first  time  the 
great  frame  tottered  nearly  to  its  fall.  A  few 
steps  on,  and  then  he  could  walk  no  further — 
barely  stand.  As  I  approached  he  wheeled  in 
his  tracks,  and  turned  his  great  shaggv  head 
and  its  glaring  eyes  upon  me,  widening  his  feet 
to  keep  his  stand.  Then  his  hinder  legs  gave 
way,  almost  letting  him  fall ;  but  with  convul- 
sive struggles,  which  seemed  to  wrinkle  the 
thick  skin  over  his  back  and  loins  as  easily  as 
if  it  had  been  silk,  he  rose  erect  again,  still  with 
his  head  u]),  gazing.  Almost  suddenly  then  he 
gathered  his  legs  under  him  and  lay  down  quiet- 
ly, breathing  hard  and  loud,  in  short,  heavj' 
pants.  Once  more  he  rose  to  his  feet,  stagger- 
ed a  few  slow  stejis  toward  me,  then  shuddered  { 
with  his  vast  bulk  from  head  to  tail,  dropped  on  ! 
his  knees,  and  failing  to  balance  himself  there, 
fell  heavily  over  u]ion  his  side,  breathed  a  few- 
more  great  gasjis,  pawed  the  air,  and  then  was 
still.  Last  of  all,  he  stretched  out  his  throat 
on  the  long  prairie  grass,  dyed  with  his  blood, 
and  gently  gave  away  his  final  breath. 
Before  I  reached  the  spot  where  the  first  bull 
fell,  the  train  had  come  up,  and  Miclielle,  with 
a  dexterity  acquired  by  more  than  thirty  years' 
practice,  had  taken  oft'  the  skin,  and  was  cut- 
ting out  the  bos  or  hump,  which,  next  to  the 
tongue,  is  the  choicest  bit  for  eating.  In  less 
than  an  hour  both  were  carved — rib  jiieces  and 
humps  and  shoulder-pieces,  we  supplied  with 
fresh  meat  for  a  week  and  jerked  meat  for  a 
fortnight — and  the  train  was  moving  on. 
That  night,  after  sujiper,  as  we  gathered 
around  the  camp-fires,  and  while  the  red  light 
was  fading  out  of  the  clouds  high  in  the  sky, 
and  the  pui-jde  passing  down  beyond  the  level 
horizon,  old  Michelle  entertained  us  witli  such 
stories  of  his  adventurous  life— of  his  buftalo 
hunts  on  snow-shoes — of  his  chases  after  herds 
of  thousands — the  goring  and  tossing  and  tramp- 
ling, biu-sting  guns  and  broken  limbs  —  such 
stories  as,  if  put  on  paper,  would  make  all  the 
exploits  of  amateurs  seem  as  tame  and  safe  as 
crossing  the  main  street  of  a  country  village. 
The  next  day  we  crossed  the  great  trails  from 
Fort  Garry  to  Turtle  Mountain,  and  passed  a 
large  encampment  ground  near  a  running  stream, 
which  had  the  same  general  a])])carance  as  the 
one  by  the  sand-hills  on  Jlouse  River.  The  bufl^a- 
lo  trails  were  very  numerous,  and  crossed  our  path 
in  every  direction,  converging  to  and  diverging 
from  the  ravines,  coulees,  and  marshes,  where 
they  had  sought  water.  The  place  for  miles  and 
miles,  in  every  direction,  was  one  huge  Golgotha. 
The  bleaehing  bones  and  skulls  of  buft'aloes,  slain 
in  former  years  by  the  hunters,  whitened  the 
green  grass  on  every  acre,  almost  on  every  rood 
of  ground ;  and  the  fresher  carcasses  of  those 
killed  during  the  year's  hunt  were  scattered  over 
the  ground,  and  tainted  the  air  in  every^  direc- 
tion.    We  could  almost  follow  the  track  of  the 
hunters  in  their  chase,  where  the  fight  had  been 
thickest,  and  hundreds  corered  a  single  acre  or 
two ;  and  where  some  sturdier  bull  had  kept  up 
a  longer  flight,  and  finally,  in  an  agony  of  thirst, 
had  fallen  and  died  in  the  middle  of  a  marsh. 
The  grass  was  of  a  greener  green,  and  the  flow- 
ers had  a  livelier  hue  which  had  been  watered 
witli  their  blood.      The  rank  verdure  made  a 
striking  frame  for  the  great  black-haired  skulls, 
or  the  heavy  arching  rib-bones,  now  bleached  to 
whiteness,  or  perchance  covered  with  shreds  of 
flesh  which  the  crows  and  hawks  and  foxes  and 
wolves  had  not  quite  devoured.     As  the  train 
passed  on  through  this  sickening  place  the  crows 
and  hawks   rose  from  their  carrion  feast,   and 
hovered  in  the  air,  shrieking  and  cawing,  till  we 
had  passed ;  and  the  gaunt  gray  wolves,  scared 
away  by  our  approach,  ran  off"  over  the  prairie 
in  long,  lithe  flexile  leaps,  now  and  then  paus- 
ing in  the  thickest  grass,  and  turning  to  watch 
us,  licking  their  chops  until  we  again  came  near- 
er, and  then  leaping  aw.ay  to  hide  in  the  long 
rushes  of  some  distant  marsh.     All  night  we 
could    hear   their   long,   melancholy   Iiowlings, 
and,  as  if  not  satisfied  with  their  filthy  feast  by 
day,   they  lurked  about  the  camp,  frightening 
the  horses  into  a  stampede,  and  not  unfrequent- 
ly  chewing  up  their  hide  lariats  within  a  dozen 
feet  of  their  heads. 
Our  journey  from  Turtle  Mountain  to  Devil's 
Lake  was  accomplished  within  a  few  days.  Buf- 
falo chases  were  an  everyday  occurrence  with 
us,  and  game  of  every  feathered  kind  was  equally 
abundant.  One  Saturday  afternoon  we  brought 
np  in  a  "  pocket"  near  the  Lac  de  Gros  Butte, 
where  we  were  protected  on  two  sides  by  water, 
and  on  one  side  by  an  impassable  marsh,  in 
which,  at  every  few' moments,  we  could  hear  the 
whirr  of  ducks  alighting  or  rising.  A  narrow 
neck  of  land  was  the  only  point  at  which  the  In- 
dians could  have  got  at  us.  The  shores  of  the 
lake,  which  takes  its  name  from  a  high  hill  near 
by,  were  strewn  with  the  carcasses  of  dead  buf- 
falo, with  huge  wolf-tracks  on  the  sand  all  about 
them,  who  had  either  been  severely  wounded  by 
the  half-breeds,  and  had  escaped  to  the  water  to 
drink,  or,  having  been  pursued,  had  attempted 
to  swim  across  the  lake  and  perished.  Here  we 
had  wood  to  build  our  fires  for  the  first  time 
since  leaving  Turtle  Mountain.  Instead  of  it,  we 
had  had  to  split  u])  the  least  necessary  parts  of 
our  carts  for  kindling  wood,  and  cook  our  pan- 
cakes over  red-hot  liois  de  vache. 
The  next  day  was  a  rainy  one ;  but  the  rain 
did  not  prevent  us  from  taking  a  horseback  ride 
to  Devil's  Lake.  It  was  through  much  tribula- 
tion that  we  succeeded  even  in  getting  to  so  ill- 
named  a  place  as  Miniwakan.  We  had  to  ford 
half  a  dozen  streams,  swimming  two  or  three  of 
them,  wade  through  marshes,  and  in  crossing 
one  stream  whose  banks  were  difficult  of  ascent 
or  descent,  we  went  around  into  the  lake  where 
it  emptied,  outside  of  its  mouth,  and  had  to  trav- 
el by  compass  (having  laid  our  direction)  for 
nearly  half  a  mile  through  water  deep  as  the 
horse's  shoulders,  and  where  the  tall  rank  rushes 
rose  from  six  to  ten  feet  higher  still,  shutting 
out  the  view  of  every  thing  but  the  sky,  which 
looked  in  our  environment  as  if  we  were  behold- 
ing it  from  a  well.  Truth  nor  our  primitive  in- 
tuitions could  have  hardly  served  us  as  well  as 
the  compass  did ;  for  we  struck  the  narrow  prom- 
ontory, for  which  ive  had  been  steering  so  blind- 
ly, at  its  only  accessible  point.  At  every  step 
we  started  up  crowds  of  blue  herons,  cranes, 
gulls,  snipe,  ducks,  geese,  and  sheitpokes. 
The  rain  fell  continuously  all  the  afternoon, 
and  we  could  not  see  the  opposite  shores  of  Dev- 
il's Lake,  which  are  doubtless  risiljle  at  some 
points  in  clear  weather.  We  could,  however, 
now  and  then  get  a  faint  glimpse  of  the  timber 
on  a  point  of  laud,  shaped  like  a  spoon,  it  is 
DEVILS  LAKE. 
i 
EETOEN  OF  THE   UUNTEKS. 
said,  with  the  bowl  entl  (lointing  out  into  the 
lake,  where  the  Imlf-biccJs  and  Indians  slaugh- 
ter hundreds  yearly.  They  surround  them  in 
large  companies,  just  as  tlie  elephants  are  trapped 
in  Ceylon,  or  as  the  buffaloes  themselves  are 
fftught  in  timber-traps  in  some  parts  of  the  Sas- 
katcliewan  district ;  and  by  careful  and  not  too 
rapid  chasing  large  herds  are  at  last  forced  to 
enter  over  this  neck  of  land,  where  the  water 
shuts  them  in  on  every  side,  and  mounted  horse- 
men are  behind  tlicm  who  may  then  shoot  them 
down  at  their  leisure. 
The  Devil's  Lake  region  is  a  favorite  camp- 
ing-ground of  the  Sioux,  and  therefore  is  most 
sluinned  by  the  half-breeds,  except  when  they 
go  in  large  andpowei"ful  companies.  The  great 
brigades  of  course  hunt  them  with  impunity: 
and  we  came  upon  their  tracks,  tlieir  cam])ing- 
grounds,  miles  of  burned  prairie  or  of  Golgothas. 
their  trails,  and  the  hea])s  of  bones,  broken,  and 
the  marrow  dug  out,  which  told  where  they  had 
been  making  pemmiran,  every  day  almost  from 
Turtle  Mountain  to  Devil's  Lake  and  Pembina. 
Beyond  this  jioint,  therefore,  across,  southwest, 
to  the  mouth  of  the  Sheyenne  on  Red  Rii'er,  or 
further  into  the  Sioux  country.  Michelle,  thought- 
ful  of  the  husband  of  his  wife,  and  the  father  of 
his  babies  waiting  for  him  at  St.  Jo,  refused  to  go. 
So  the  explorer  was  unable  to  learn  if  the 
hypothenuse  of  the  triangle  from  Upper  Red 
River  to  the  south  bend  of  tlie  Saskatchewan 
was  as  much  better  and  briefer  for  travelers  as 
it  is  for  mathematicians. 
From  the  Lac  de  Gros  Butte,  therefore,  we, 
all  together,  took  the  straight  Devil's  Lake  and 
St.  Jo  trail.  My  journal  of  the  date  says  : 
"We  have  ended  now  our  travel  without  trails, 
and  soon  trails  will  be  roads,  and  roads  railroads, 
to  carry  us  Eastward  Ho ! " 
The  last  day  of  August,  late  in  the  afteraoon, 
we  came  to  the  brow  of  Pembina  Mount  or  pla- 
teau, from  which  we  could  overlook  St.  Jo, 
live  miles  away.  We  were  still  500  miles  from 
the  outposts  of  American  civilization ;  but  we 
greeted  the  log-houses  of  the  half-breeds  with  as 
much  enthusiasm  as  we  could  possibly  have  done 
the  dome  of  the  New  York  City  Hall  with  the 
figure  of  Justice  sui'mounting  it.  The  trail  was 
worn  deep ;  tlie  trees  on  tlie  ])latoau,  and  down 
its  side,  were  large  and  thickly  leafed,  and  no- 
thing could  have  added  to  the  beauty  of  sunset, 
which  cast  such  long  shadows  down  the  side  of 
the  hill  and  over  the  prairie,  except,  perhaps,  the 
siglit  of  a  train  of  half-breeds  returning  from  the 
summer  hunts,  with  loaded  carts  creaking  heav- 
ily along  the  winding  road,  down  the  mountain 
side,  the  men  in  their  bright  colors,  and  their 
horses  g.ayly  caparisoned — home  in  sight,  the 
last  camping-ground  passed. 
Some  such  sight  as  this  we  saw  a  little  after 
sunrise  the  next  day.  While  at  breakfast  we 
heard,  near  by  in  a  ravine  of  the  thick  woods 
which  surrounded  us  on  every  side,  Sioux  war- 
songs.  Michelle  and  Joe,  fearful  that  a  war- 
party  of  the  rascals  was  on  our  track,  hurried  to 
the  horses,  unjjickcted  and  harnessed  them,  load- 
ed the  carts,  and  all  of  us  were  in  the  saddle 
and  pushing  on  briskly  to  St.  Jo  in  less  than 
five  minutes.  It  was  .a  false  alarm,  however. 
We  heard  nothing  farther  from  tliem  as  wc 
galloped  on  through  the  majestic  woods  which 
covered  the  slojie  of  the  mount  and  skirted  the 
Pembina  River  on  either  side.  We  slackened 
our  pace  after  putting  the  river  between  us,  and 
entering  St.  Jo,  drove  to  Kittson's  Post.  We 
had  hardly  got  inside  of  the  stockades,  shaken 
hands  with  every  man  in  the  town,  answered  in- 
terrogatories pro])ounded  in  French,  Chijipewa. 
Crec,  and  Nistoneaux,  before  we  heard  a  volley 
of  musketry  in  tlie  woods,  rapidly  succeeded  by 
another  and  another,  and  mingled  with  shouts 
and  halloos  that  could  come  from  none  but  semi- 
civilized  throats. 
The  party  soon  emerged  from  the  woods ;  the 
very  carts  dragged  along  at  a  lively  trot,  swift 
riders  galloping  ahead,  some  of  them  with  huge 
white  butialo  skins  trailing  from  tlieir  shoulders, 
like  the  vestments  of  a  priest  at  high  mass,  and 
painted  with  savage  devices  and  in  gaudy  col- 
ors ;  others  in  the  blanket  and  leggins  of  Sioux 
braves,  tricked  out  with  painted  (yiills  or  brill- 
iant wampum  ;  others  still  in  the  half-breed 
dress,  woolens,  with  handsome  bead  decorations, 
skin  caps — a  motley  crowd,  headed  by  Battiste 
Wilkie,  the  President  of  the  Councilors  of  St. 
Jo.  It  was  a  deputation  of  half-breeds  return- 
ing from  a  grand  treaty-making  with  the  Sioux 
at  Devil's  Lake. 
TO  RED  EIVER  AND  BEYOND. 
[SrjitH  ^apet.] 
ONE  Tuesday  morn- 
ing we  began  our 
journey  from  Pembina 
to  the  Selkirk  settle- 
meat. 
Joe  Rolette,  our  host, 
with  his  two  little  boys 
whom  he  was  taking  to 
the  Catholic  school  at  the 
settlement  after  the  sum- 
mer vacation ;  Mr.  Bot- 
tineau, a  French  half- 
breed,  whose  excellent 
farm  between  St.  Joseph 
and  Pembina  I  have  men- 
tioned in  another  place ; 
Joseph,  and  myself  were 
of  the  party.  Joe  Ro- 
lette rode  in  a  miniature 
Red  River  cart  with  his 
youngest  boy  — a  minia- 
ture of  himself — behind 
a  diminutive  mule  re- 
joicing in  the  title  of 
Thomas  Jefferson,  and 
with  a  genuine  patriot- 
ism responding  by  an 
accelerated  gait  to  the 
exclamation  of  his  ab- 
breviated Christian  name 
— "Tom!"  Tom  was  a 
mule  in  miniature,  sav- 
ing only  his  ears,  and 
held  together  in  his  lit- 
tle and  tight  fitting  skin 
all  the  virtues  and  none 
of  the  vices  of  the  race 
of  which  he  was  the  min- 
imum. The  cart  which 
he  drew  was  loaded  with 
all  the  blankets  of  the  party,  the  cooking  uten- 
sils, pemmican,  bread,  and  other  provisions,  and 
the  passengers  mentioned ;  but  he  drew  it  along 
at  a  lively  trot  from  sunrise  to  sunset,  forty-four 
miles  a  day,  with  the  vigor  and  continuity  of 
the  balance-ivheel  of  a  chronometer,  and  tired 
out  even  the  first-rate  horses  which  the  rest  of 
us  rode. 
A  few  words  will  describe  the  appearance  of 
the  country  between  Pembina  and  Fort  Garry. 
In  all  external  aspects,  to  one  who  travels  by 
the  river  road,  it  is  the  same  from  Fort  Aber- 
crombie  to  within  a  few  miles  of  Lake  Winni- 
l)eg.  The  direction  of  the  road  is  very  nearly 
north.  It  is  the  continuous  cliord  to  which  the 
river,  in  its  winding  course,  supplies  a  hundred 
greater  or  lesser  arcs.  The  banks  of  the  river 
are  thickly  wooded  with  elm,  oak,  and  poplar, 
and  this  wall  of  trees  is  at  the  traveler's  right 
throughout  the  journey,  always  bounding  the 
eastern  horizon.     This  general  prospect  is  varied 
JFJU?  BiTTISTE  WFLKIE. 
Presiilent  of  tha  CouDcUorB  of  St.  Joseph,  in  Siom  TsRrrior's  dress.— See  Sfaffazine,  October,  1B61». 
by  lines  of  timber  stretching  away  to  the  west, 
and  marking  the  course  of  the  tributaries  of  Red 
River. 
About  the  middle  of  the  forenoon,  near  one 
of  these  tributary  streams,  we  came  in  view  of  a 
shanty,  inhabited  by  .an  old  Scotchman  and  his 
wife — she  the  first  white  woman  in  the  Selkirk 
settlement.  We  were  treated  to  bowls  of  fresh 
milk,  with  the  cream  standing  thick  upon  it. 
and  making  a  man  blush  to  remember  that  he 
came  from  a  city  where  stump-tailed  abomina- 
tions and  watery-blue  dilutions  had  long  since 
led  him  to  forget  the  appearance  of  the  genuine 
lacteal  fluid. 
The  shanty  was  not  neat  nor  well  furnished. 
The  bed,  which  stood  in  one  comer,  was  small 
and  narrow,  the  walls  had  never  been  white- 
washed, nor  the  mud  floor  boarded  over,  though 
the  cooking-stove  and  table,  which  also  occupied 
this  their  only  apartment,  left  little  of  the  floor 
to  be  seen  or  trodden  upon. 
An  hour  after  sunset  we  came  to  the  spot 
where  we  were  to  pass  the  night.  It  was  one 
always  used  by  the  phiin  hunters,  and  marked 
by  heaps  of  ashes,  charred  stumps,  and  well- 
»rorn  paths  leadiuf;  down  to  the  water's  edge. 
An  okl  man  and  his  wile  had  come  to  the  camp- 
ground before  us,  and  were  camping  lialf-way 
down  the  bank,  to  be  slieltered  from  the  cold 
wind  wliicli  was  blowing  over  the  prairie.  As 
we  led  our  horses  down  to  the  water,  we  could 
see  their  faces  by  the  camp-fire,  both  wrinkled 
and  seamed  with  old  age,  and  his  wliite  hairs 
and  stooping  figure  indicating  that  he  had  passed 
the  threescore  and  ten,  beyond  wliich  all  is  la- 
bor and  trouble.  He  was  sitting  on  the  ground 
in  the  lee  of  a  large  log,  smoking  a  short  pipe, 
while  the  woman  was  blowing  tlie  embers  of 
their  fire  to  get  a  coal  to  put  in  lier  own.  They 
had  evidently  had  tlieir  scanty  supjier  of  tea  and 
pemmican,  and  had  spread  their  single  pair  of 
blankets  in  preparation  for  the  niglit.  Our  host 
knew  them,  and  wlien  we  had  made  our  own 
huge  fire  on  the  prairie — of  logs  too  large  for 
tlicm  to  lift — and  were  eating  supper  by  its  cheer- 
ful blaze,  he  told  us  their  story. 
It  was  the  pitiful  story  of  another  Lear.  The 
old  man  had  been  strong  and  vigorous,  and  well 
to  do  in  his  prime,  fiimous  as  a  breaker  of  horses, 
and  had  gathered  togetlier  a  little  property, 
enough,  if  well  husbanded,  to  keep  him  and  his 
wife  from  poverty.  All  this,  when  he  began  to 
feel  the  infirmities  of  age,  he  had  given  to  an 
adopted  son,  asking  in  return  only  the  food  and 
shelter  necessary  for  his  few  remaining  years. 
For  a  short  time  he  was  well  cared  for;  but 
when  tliis  foithless  wretch  had  it  all  securely  in 
his  hands,  and  he  became  accustomed  to  its  pos- 
session, he  set  the  old  pair  adrift,  and  now  is 
laying  up  ill-gotten  wealth,  and  counts  his  cattle 
on  Sundays,  and  thanks  God  he  is  not  poor  as 
other  men  are,  and  goes  to  sleep  comfortably 
housed,  while  the  cold  wind  and  rain  drench  the 
white  liairs  of  the  old  man  and  womait  who  had 
called  him  son. 
We  were  up  and  off  long  before  sunrise  (but 
the  old  man  and  his  wife  had  started  before  us), 
and  rode  fifteen  miles  briskly  before  breakfast, 
meeting  several  Rod  River  trains,  wliich  had 
made  an  early  start  on  their  way  to  St.  Paul  or 
the  plains.  We  stopped  for  breakfast  at  the 
house  of  Mr.  John  I)ace,  which  marks  the  be- 
ginning of  the  more  thickly  inhaljitcd  part  of  the 
Red  River  settlement — from  this  jioint  stretch- 
ing down  to  the  vicinity  of  Lake  Winnipeg, 
clustering  most  thickly  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort 
Garry,  si.xteen  miles  below. 
At  Mr.  Dace's  house  every  thing  was  in  strong 
contrast  with  the  house  at  which  we  had  lunched 
on  the  previous  morning.  Neatness  and  thrift 
were  obvious  at  a  gl.ance.  The  men  were  out  in 
the  fields  g.nthering  in  the  harvest,  and  the  warm 
sunshine  of  an  autumn  morning  was  lying  on  the 
clean  plank  floor,  as  it  loves  to  lie  where  there  is 
stillness,  and  it  can  make  cool  shadows.  The 
morning's  work  had  long  been  completed,  the 
floor  scrubbed,  every  thing  set  to  rights,  and  tlie 
baby  sent  to  sleep  in  a  swinging  hammock,  made 
of  long  cord  and  a  shawl,  by  the  time  we  came. 
In  the  adjoining  apartment  we  could  hear  the 
low  talk  of  women.  The  wife  of  Mr.  Dace,  a 
half-breed  woman  inclined  to  corpulency,  soon 
came  in,  and  learned  our  wishes ;  and  while 
breakfost  was  preparing  for  us  in  the  next  room 
we  had  time  to  look  round  us.  The  room  was 
a  spacious  one  for  a  block-house,  and  one  of  the 
heavy  beams  which  ran  under  tlie  ceiling  wa> 
supported  by  a  stout  post,  against  which  the 
baby's  hammock  swung,  giving  him  a  slight 
jerk,  which,  to  a  metropolitan  baby,  for  in- 
stance, would  have  been  any  thing  but  sleep- 
provoking.  A  double  bed,  on  which  I  could 
see  plenty  of  good  blankets,  but  no  white  sheets, 
stood  in  one  corner,  and  two  or  three  old  oak 
trunks  served  for  seats  on  one  side  of  the  room. 
The  chairs  were  of  the  same  sulistantial  home- 
made manufacture,  and  one  or  two  had  bottom;- 
of  hide,  like  those  of  snow-shoes.  The  tabic 
was  an  old-feshioned  one,  the  leaves  supported 
by  swinging  legs.  The  walls  were  neatly  white- 
washed, and  where  the  plastering  had  been 
rubbed  the  invariable  neatness  of  the  apart- 
ment was  preserved,  though  at  the  expense  of 
mortar.  The  windows  were  small,  and  the  door 
low — the  doors  being  accommodated  to  the  size 
of  the  windows,  perliaps,  and  the  saslies  to  the 
size  and  costliness  of  the  little  six  by  eight  panes 
which,  when  the  house  was  built,  were  worth 
Is.  G(/.  sterling.  Through  the  open  door  we 
could  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  waters  of  tlie  river, 
red  wliere  the  sun  shone  upon  them  through  the 
trees,  from  beliinc^  us.  Pigeons  and  wild  geese, 
witli  potatoes  and  turnips  unsurpassable  any 
where ;  bread  and  butter,  cheese  and  tea,  white 
sugar  and  cream  were  set  before  tis.  Mr.  Dace 
was  too  far  back  in  the  fields  on  the  prairie  to 
be  called;  but  as  we  drove  on  we  noted  the 
luxuriant  growth  of  the  vegetables  in  his  gar- 
den, and  tlie  thickness  of  the  sheaves  in  his 
wlieat  field. 
Delayed  by  Joe's  horse-racing  and  a  drunk- 
en ferryman,  above  the  settlement,  we  did  not 
come  in  siglit  of  the  spires  of  the  Cathidrak  dr 
Saint  Bonifiice  till  near  sunset.  At  last  they 
ajipearcd — two  bright  lines  rising  above  the  last 
grove  of  ])oplar  trees  through  which  we  had  ti^ 
pass,  standing  out  clear  and  glistening  against 
the  deep  blue  of  the  sky,  and  surmounted  by  the 
cross.  A  little  farther  on  we  left  the  woods  be- 
hind us,  and  came  in  full  view  of  the  heart  of 
the  Red  River  settlement — the  very  spot  where, 
half  a  century  ago,  the  Earl  of  Selkirk  planted 
his  colony.  Close  at  our  left  was  another  field 
of  wheat,  half  of  it  hai-vested,  and  each  pile  of 
yellow  sheaves  sending  its  long  eastward  shadow 
over  the  closely  shaven  plain.  Near  at  hand 
two  half-breeds  were  loading  a  cart,  and  where 
the  standing  wli^at  began,  a  group  of  reapers 
were  busy  at  work  with  sickle  and  scythe,  wo- 
men following  behind,  raking  and  binding,  u.^d 
adding  to  the  golden  tents  upon  the  field  at  one 
end  as  fast  as  they  were  taken  aw.ay  at  the  other. 
Tlie  red  sashes  which  most  of  the  men  wore  snp- 
CATnEDKAL  OF  6T.    BONIFACE. 
j)lie(i  the  only  lacking  color  in  the  landscape. 
Beyond  them,  to  the  west,  flowed  the  winding 
blue  line  of  the  river,  tojjped  by  the  dark  brown 
of  its  farther  bank,  left  in  shade  by  the  setting 
sun.  A  mile  beyond,  on  its  western  bank,  just 
where  the  shaded  blue  waters  of  the  Red  River 
were  augmented  by  the  gleaming  silver  of  the 
Assiniboine,  on  which  as  it  flowed  from  the  west 
the  sun  still  shone  brightly,  stood  the  massive 
quadrangle  of  Fort  Garry,  with  its  four  cone- 
topped  bastions ;  and  directly  ahead  of  us,  on 
one  side  of  the  river  and  close  to  its  banks,  a  few 
rods  further  on,  whither  all  the  waters  of  the 
two  rivers  seemed  to  sway  and  flow,  arose  the 
high  walls  of  the  Cathedral  of  Saint  Boniface, 
surmounted  by  the  two  glistening  spires  which 
liad  greeted  us  at  a  distance. 
Fort  Garry  is  a  very  fine  structure.  The  ex- 
terior wall  is  of  limestone,  quaiTied  on  the  river 
liank  near  by.  At  the  four  corners  are  four  im- 
posing bastions.  Of  the  thickly -crowded  houses 
within,  one  or  two  may  be  of  the  same  material, 
limestone,  but  most  are  of  wood,  including  the 
Company's  officers'  quarters,  and  tliose  of  the 
oflicers  of  the  Royal  Canadian  Rifles,  a  company 
of  which  is  stationed  here,  whose  rations  are  sup- 
plied by  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company.  As  you 
enter  the  spacious  quadrangle  by  the  arched 
gate-way,  which  opens  to  the  south  close  to  the 
bank  of  the  Assiniboine,  tlie  impression  is  the 
usual  one  at  sight  of  soldiers'  barracks ;  but  pass- 
ing to  the  building  at  the  northern  end  of  tlie 
square,  and  by  the  soldiers  and  sen-ants  who  are 
straggling  about,  this  impression  vanishes  as  you 
come  in  view  of  the  spacious  edifice  in  which 
Chief  Factor  JI'Tavish,  who  is  also  Governor 
M'Tavish,  of  the  colony  of  Assiniboia,  resides. 
We  were  treated  with  great  courtesy  by  the 
Governor  during  our  stay  in  the  settlement,  and 
the  innumerable  questions  which  the  current  of 
conversation  and  recent  events  led  us  to  ask, 
were  responded  to  with  an  unfailing  freedom  and 
sincerity.  In  some  of  the  Canadian  commis- 
sioners' reports  the  reticence  and  the.  misrepre- 
sentations of  the  Company's  oflicers  are  dwelt 
u])on,  but  in  this  quarter,  at  least — and  it  is  the 
highest  in  the  settlement — we  found  neither. 
Governor  M'Tavish  is  a  gentleman  of  Scotch 
birth  or  descent,  as  his  name  and  appearance  in- 
dicate. His  figure  is  tall,  and  his  head  finely 
shaped,  with  a  broad,  high  brow,  which,  without 
particularly  jutting  eyebrows,  gives  you  the  im- 
pression of  mental  calibre.  The  wrinkles  upon 
his  forehead  and  face  are  such  as  care,  not  age, 
accounts  for,  and  are  set-oft'  by  the  Palmerston 
style  of  whisker  and  a  heavy  mustache,  together 
with  long  sandy  hair,  in  which  the  streaks  of 
gr.ay  are  only  beginning  to  appear.  His  man- 
ners had  the  quiet,  well-bred  tone  oftener  found 
among  Englishmen  than  others,  and  his  voice  is 
low  from  the  same  cause  or  from  some  bronchial 
aft'ection.  Energy,  determination,  and  execu- 
tive ability  were  tiie  obvious  characteristics  of 
the  man.  'Uliat  we  had  before  learned  of  his 
culture  and  tastes  was  confinned  by  the  books 
which  we  saw  lying  on  the  table  and  book-cases. 
At  many  of  the  posts  of  the  Com]>any  the 
year's  business  is  done  up  in  a  few  weeks,  and 
till  the  same  season  rolls  around  again  there  is 
an  absence  of  all  employment,  and  a  closing  out 
of  all  news,  such  as  afi'ords  the  common  food  of 
thought  to  most  persons  linked  by  daily  er  week- 
ly newspajjers  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  Some 
of  the  Company's  officers  are  wise  enough  to  im- 
prove these  long  intervals  of  leisure,  taking  care 
to  supply  themselves  with  books,  which  do  not 
perish  with  the  single  using.  The  Governor  was 
long  stationed  at  York  Factory,  where  all  the 
business  of  the  year  is  crowded  into  the  brief  two 
months  in  which  the  ships  of  supply  from  En- 
gland, and  the  boats  from  the  interior  posts  with 
furs,  arrived  and  departed,  and  there  or  elsewhere 
made  himself  a  learned  man. 
In  regard  to  the  settlement  of  the  northwestern 
FOET   GAREV. 
areas,  it  may  be  well  here  to  obsen-e  that,  inas- 
much as  timber  occurs  mainly  on  the  banks  of 
rivers,  their  population  will  be  greatly  retarded 
or  increased  by  the  knowledge  of  the  existence 
of  other  kinds  of  fuel  at  accessible  points.  We 
had  been  repeatedly  informed  by  half-breeds  of 
the  existence  of  coal  or  lignite  in  strata  in  the 
banks  of  Mouse  River  and  the  Saskatchewan. 
Governor  M'Tavish  showed  us  pieces  of  lignite 
from  that  river — the  first  that  we  had  seen — and 
confirmed  the  fact  of  its  existence  on  the  upper 
waters  of  Mouse  River.  He  added,  that  it  was 
used  habitually  during  the  winter  at  Fort  Pitt ; 
and  a  retired  chief  factor,  whom  we  aftcnvard 
visited,  told  us  that  at  his  former  station,  at  the 
Carlton  House,  it  had  supplied  their  blacksmith's 
forge.  The  important  bearing  of  this  fact  upon 
the  future  population  of  the  northwestern  coun- 
try is  apparent.  There  is  considerable  pine  tim- 
ber upon  the  great  streams  of  this  northern  riv- 
er system ;  and  if  trees  were  planted  with  pains 
by  all  new  settlers,  a  sufficient  supply  for  or- 
dinary purposes  might  be  kept  up.  But  it  is  to 
be  taken  into  the  account,  that  in  these  high 
latitudes  the  winter  season  is  of  longer  duration 
than  in  the  equally  fertile  and  likewise  timber- 
less  prairie  districts  of  our  own  Northwestern 
States.  As  the  need  shall  arise  these  mines  of 
coal  will,  therefore,  be  worked,  and  will  supply 
the  fuel  of  millions  for  a  thousand  years.  Such 
difficulties  as  are  now  had  in  burning  it  will  not 
be  experienced  when  coal  stoves  supply  the  place 
of  the  open  hearth. 
I  suppose  that  Norman  TV.  Kittson  is  the  man 
who  has  done  as  much  as  any  one  to  break  uy 
their  happy  solitude.  As  long  ago  as  1844  he 
was  guilty  of  forging  the  first  link  which  con- 
nected the  Jlississippi  and  the  Red  River  of  the 
North.  As  always,  trade  was  the  occasion  of 
the  enterprise.  Ills  store,  which  was  formerly 
at  Pembina,  on  our  side  of  the  international  line, 
tapped  the  rich  fin-  trade,  in  which,  north  of  the 
line,  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  had  a  monop- 
oly, and  perhaps  he  now  and  then  purchased 
from  hunters  north  of  the  line  skins  to  balance 
those  which  the  Company's  men  gathered  south 
of  it.  Now  the  license  of  exclusive  trade  has 
expired,  and  Mr.  Kittson  is  allowed  an  open  ri- 
valry in  the  settlement  itself.  His  store  stand> 
on  the  cast  bank  of  the  Red  River,  opposite  the 
mouth  of  the  Assiniboine.  He  and  other  enter- 
prising traders,  during  the  year  185  7,  sent  through 
St.  Paul  houses,  for  exportation  below,  more  than 
■i  1 20, 000  worth  of  furs.  Bloreover,  traders  and 
private  parties  are  sending  money  as  well  as  furs 
to  St.  Paul,  for  sujiplies.  Formerly  they  had  to 
rely  on  the  favor  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company, 
and  undergo  the  delay,  and  share  the  expense  of 
tlie  loug  trip  of  the  ships  from  York  Factory  to 
England  and  back.  Now  the  round  trip  can  bo 
made,  by  way  of  St.  Paul  and  New  York,  in 
thirty  to  forty  days,  and  in  the  year  mentioned 
as  much  money's  worth  of  money  as  of  furs  was 
left  by  these  people  in  St.  Paul— w  120, 000. 
A  day  or  two  after  our  visit  to  Fort  Garry,  Jo- 
seph and  I  hired  two  saddle-horses,  for  a  trij)  to 
the  lower  stone  fort,  properly  called  Lower  Fort 
Garry.     We  had  crossed  the  river  at  this  ])oint 
before  in  a  canoe,  but  the  difficulty  experienced 
in  getting  our  horses  over  tlie  two  rivers — Red 
River  and  the  Assiniboine — gave  us  a  realizing 
sense  of  the  nature  of  the  ferry  and  ferryman, 
and  new  facts  for  generalization  as  to  tlie  char- 
acter of  tlie  Red  River  half-breeds.     I  believe 
the  person  who  leases  the  ferry-boat  pays  £20  a 
year  for  the  privilege,  and  charges  three-pence 
for  a  passage;    but  the  ferry-boy,  according  to 
our  observation,  spends  a  jiortion  of  his  time 
dodging  the  demands  on  his  paddles  and  his  pa- 
tience.    The  bank  of  the  river  is  of  stratified 
clay,  which  in  rainy  weather  is  exceedingly  slip- 
pery, and  accumulates  in  tremendous  quantities 
about  the  feet ;  and  there  is  nothing  to  prevent 
horse,  eart,  or  man  from  slipping  from  the  top 
of  the  bank  into  the  river,  except  a  log  or  two 
where  the  boat  lands.     It  has  never  entered  into 
the  mind  of  the  owner  of  the  ferry,  I  presume, 
to  save  himself  the  delay  of  carts  in  getting  down 
the  bank  carefully,  by  building  a  plank  walk 
with  elects  from  its  top  down  to  low-water  mark. 
The  ferry-boat  is  a  flat  boat  twice  as  long  as 
broad,  and  tackled  to  a  cable  which  is  stretched 
from  shore  to  shore.     The  rope  which  connects 
the  forward  end  of  the  boat  with  the  cable  being 
shortened,  the  side  of  the  boat  is  swung  around 
so  that  the  current  helps  to  shove  it  over.     The 
same  steep  and  muddy  bank  is  at  the  west  side 
of  the  river ;  also  on  the  south  side  of  the  Assin- 
iboine—the  same  lazy  ferry  over  it,  and  the  same 
unplanked  bank  on  its  north  side.      Moj-eover, 
there  is  no  boat  running  straight  across  the  Red 
River  below  the  Assiniboine.     To  cross  from  the 
east  side  of  the  Red  River  to  the  side  below  the 
Assiniboine,  where  Fort  Garry  stands,  one  must 
needs  cross  both  rivers  in  this  tedious  way,  sub- 
ject to  the  mercy  of  the  mud  if  it  rains,  of  the 
ferryman  if  he  is  lazy,  and  of  the  two  rivers  in 
any  case.     We  were  an  hour  and  a  half  in  get- 
ting to  the  fort  with  our  horses,  in  spite  of  work- 
ing our  passage  by  hauling  at  the  ropes.     If 
things  work  as  they  will  work,  my  opinion  is 
that  that  ferryman  will  go  to  his  grave  haunted 
by  visions  of  a  jjlanked  bank  down  to  the  Styx, 
and  Charon  as  a  driving  Yankee  running  a  two- 
horse  ferry-boat  across  the  damned  river ;  and  it 
is  not  impossible  that,  on  stormy  nights,  the  good 
Doctor,  who  resides  at  the  fort  near  at  hand,  may 
bo  waked  from  his  virtuous  slumbers  by  the  shout 
of  some  future  bold  captain  calling  on  his  men, 
through  tlie  wind  and  rain,  to  take  a  reef  in  the 
stove-pipe,  or  to  whip  up  the  nigh  horse. 
But  we  were  over  at  last,  and  spurring  our 
horses,  galloped  on  down  the  river.  A  few 
sketches  made  on  our  return  journey  will  give 
the  reader  an  idea  of  the  appearance  of  the  views 
at  two  or  three  of  the  principal  points  between 
tlie  two  forts.  But  it  must  be  left  to  his  imag- 
ination to  picture  the  immense  fields  of  wheat 
which  we  found,  some  on  the  right  of  us  going . 
to  the  houses,  wliich  continuously  skirt  the  river, 
and  others  to  the  left  of  us  extended  over  the 
jirairie  almost  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach.  As 
along  the  bank  on  the  other  side  of  the  river, 
above  Fort  Garry,  so  on  this  side  of  the  bank 
below  it,  the  straight  road  led  us  through  poplar 
forests  and  shrubbery,  through  which,  at  every 
bend  of  the  river,  we  could  catch  glimpses  of  the 
fields  of  wheat,  or  barley,  or  potatoes,  or  oats— 
the  neat  white  homes  of  the  settlers  rising  at  fre- 
quent intervals,  surrounded  by  their  well-thatch- 
ed outbuildings,  and  hay  or  wheat  stacks— these 
daily  growing  more  numerous,  for  our  journey 
was  made  in  the  very  middle  of  harvest  time, 
and  part  of  it  in  the  light  of  the  harvest  moon. 
Often  the  dwelling  of  some  retired  Hudson's 
Bay  Conqiany  officer  might  be  seen  on  a  com- 
manding iioiiit,  distinguished  by  its  superior  size 
and  height  from  the  buildings  around  it.  Here 
numbers  of  the  old  factors  or  traders  of  the  Com- 
pany are  contented  to  return  and  spend  the  rest 
of  their  days,  among  the  scenes  and  under  a  ju- 
risdiction familiar  and  agreeable  to  them,  relying 
for  news  of  the  entire  world  ujion  their  montlily 
files  of  the  English  newspapers ;  for  supplies  of 
the  necessaries  of  life  upon  the  half-breed  farm- 
ers and  hunters  around  them,  and  of  its  luxuries 
upon  their  annual  importations  from  England, 
or,  in  latter  years,  the  States. 
Spires  of  churches,  and  the  long  arms  of  wind- 
mills, broke  the  level  lines  of  the  pictures  thai 
greeted  our  eyes  as  the  road  led  us  on  from  open 
place  to  oiJcu  place,  through  the  poplars  that 
surrounded  it  for  a  ]jortion  of  the  way.  Wind- 
mills grind  the  wheat  for  all  the  settlers.  There- 
is  one  steam-mill,  with  two  run  of  stones  and  a 
set  of  saws.  It  was  not  grinding  or  sawing  when 
we  passed ;  but  in  its  shadow  two  men  were  la- 
boriously dragging  at  either  end  of  a  heavy  rip 
saw,  though  the  circular  was  in  perfect  order. 
Whose  fault  this  is  I  can  not  guess,  but  it  is 
clear  that  in  an  American  settlement  the  settlei's 
would  not  suffer  it  to  be  any  one's  fault. 
In  like  manner  the  road,  which  had  been  be- 
gun to  be  mended  in  several  places,  was  left  half 
finished,  its  last  state  worse  than  its  first.  In 
dry  weather,  however,  it  is  as  level  as  a  floor. 
Tliere  is  a  bridle-path  close  on  the  banks  of  the 
river,  but  no  road. 
Our  own  horses  we  had  left  at  Pembina,  to  get 
fat  for  the  home  journey,  and  the  horses  which  we 
hired  for  this  trip  might  have  been  buftalo  run- 
ners in  their  day,  but  their  days  must  have  been 
in  Lord  Selkirk's  time.  It  was  dark  before  we 
had  got  half-way  to  the  lower  fort.     Wo  di-cw 
EESIDENOE  Of  J.  U.  HAEKIOTT,  EfiQ. 
hriflle,  therefore,  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  J.  H. 
Harriott,  a  retired  chief  factor  of  the  Hudson's 
Bay  Company,  to  wliom  we  had  letters,  and 
whose  residence  was  a  mile  nearer  than  the  low- 
er fort,  where -we  had  at  first  intended  to  pass 
the  night. 
A  true  gentleman  of  the  old  school — th.at  we 
were  within  the  walls  of  his  house  was  sufficient 
reason  why  he  should  treat  us  like  princes. 
Though,  to  tell  the  truth,  we  did  not  even  have 
the  honor  of  resemhling  princes  incognito.  One 
summer's  journey  on  the  prairies  had  reduced  us 
almost  to  extremities  in  the  matter  of  clothing. 
We  wore  horrowed  "  biled  shirts,"  mine  covered 
with  a  borrowed  coat  once  and  a  half  too  large, 
and  Joseph's  covered  with  a  coat,  his  own,  so 
ragged  that  that  had  to  be  concealed  by  an  over- 
coat just  a  little  better.  As  for  our  trowsers, 
"  the  least  said  the  soonest  mended;"  and  they 
would  have  stood  but  little  mending  more.  With 
hair  uncut  and  beards  untrimmed,  sun-burned, 
and  looking  more  like  foot-pads  than  gentlemen, 
we  had  ventured  upon  this  journey  with  a  degree 
of  confidence  in  the  natural  agreeableness  of  our 
countenances  and  amenity  of  our  manners — that 
they  would  interpret  us  aright — such  as,  under 
better  clothes,  we  should  never  have  dared  to 
indulge.  As  we  rode  along  in  the  twilight,  we 
had  amused  ourselves  by  assuming  to  be  what 
we  must  have  seemed — Dick  Turpins,  Jack 
Shepherds,  patent-safe  men — but  before  riding 
into  Mr.  Harriott's  gate  recovered  our  dignity 
as  possible  princes. 
None  of  our  suspicions  seemed  to  have  entered 
the  minds  of  our  host  and  Iiostess.  Wliile  we 
remained  under  their  roof — a  period  protracted 
at  their  own  request — we  were  the  recipients  of 
a  bountiful  lios])itality. 
From  numerous  long  and  interesting  conver- 
sations with  our  host,  we  obtained  many  partic- 
ulars regarding  the  management  and  practical 
working  of  the  Company's  ojierations,  and  es- 
pecially regarding  the  geography  of  the  Sas- 
katchewan district  and  the  district  lying  be- 
tween its  waters  and  those  of  the  Missouri  and 
of  the  Rocky  Mountains,  from  the  Kootonais 
pass  northward.  In  the  various  capacities  of 
clerk,  chief  trader,  and  chief  factor,  Mr.  Harriott 
had  traveled  over  or  resided  in  many  places  in 
this  vast  territory.  Now  establishing  a  trading- 
post  at  the  foot  of  the  Rocky  Blountains ;  now  in 
charge  of  tlie  Carlton  House  or  of  Fort  Pitt,  on 
the  head-waters  of  the  Saskatchewan ;  and,  again, 
leading  parties,  with  a  rich  freight  of  furs, 
through  a  dangerous  Indian  country ;  and  there, 
or  elsewhere,  having  such  hair-breadth  escapes, 
and  such  exciting  adventures,  undergoing  such 
risks,  and  hardships,  and  exposure,  as  would 
make  one  thrill  to  hear,  though  never  to  be 
heard  from  his  lijjs  except  by  solicitation,  which 
added  the  charm  of  unconscious  modesty  to 
what  was  already  sufiiciently  brave  and  admira- 
ble. 
A  view  of  Mr.  Harriott's  residence  is  given 
above,  and  may  be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  better 
class  of  dwellings  in  the  Selkirk  settlement.  It 
is  built  of  limestone,  quarried  from  the  native 
rock,  and  within  and  without  was  jjlanned  by 
its  owner.  One  fact  reveals  some  of  the  causes 
of  the  stagnation  of  things  at  Red  River.  Mr. 
II.,  when  building  his  house,  left  in  the  spacious 
dining-room  an  arching  alcove  for  a  side-board, 
at  the  same  time  giving  a  cabinet-maker  at  the 
settlement  an  order  to  fill  it.  Several  years 
have  elapsed,  but  what  with  the  cabinet-maker 
hunting,  and  farming,  and  doing  notliing,  Mr. 
H.  has  not  yet  seen  even  the  wood  of  which 
his  side-board  is  to  be  made. 
A  few  well-selected  books,  house-plants  in  the 
windows,  choice  engravings  on  tlie  wall,  riding 
LOtt'EB  rOKT  GAEEV. 
whips  and  guns  in  tlie  Iiall,  tobacco  jar  and  pipes 
on  the  sido-table,  a  melodeon  and  accordeon 
and  music-box  in  the  room  ivhicli  New  England- 
■»rs  call  a  parlor,  tell  the  story  of  how  the  pleas- 
ant summer  days  and  long  winter  nights  are 
whiled  away,  and  how  a  life  of  exposure  and  ad- 
venture and  toil  is  rounded  with  rest  and  calm 
and  domestic  peace. 
'  One  pleasant  afternoon  our  host  ordered  his 
carriage  to  the  door  and  drove  us  to  the  "  Stone 
Fort."  The  horses  were  a  gay  pair,  and  whirled 
their  load  down  the  graveled  walk  and  over  the 
bridge  and  along  the  road  at  a  pace  that  needed 
a  strong  hand  on  the  reins.  The  carryall  was 
of  a  soberer  sort,  imported  from  England  by  way 
of  Hudson's  Bay  and  York  Factory,  and  of  a  i>at- 
tern  not  now  in  fiishion  here  or  there — low, 
heavy  wheels,  thick,  substantial  whiffle-trees, 
high  dash-board,  and  a  body  like  that  of  tlie  cai-- 
riages  of  well-to-do  English  sipiires  half  a  cen- 
tury ago.  We  were  soon  at  the  fort.  The 
view  here  given  was  taken  from  the  south — the 
direction  in  which  we  came.  Tlie  fort  is  built 
of  solid  limestone,  as  are  many  of  the  buildings 
inclosed,  and  is,  perhaps,  the  most  imposing  of 
the  Company's  structures.  It  was  erected  at  the 
advice  of  Sir  George  Simpson,  but  has  never 
been  of  the  use  which  was  anticipated  for  it.  Its 
capacious  buildings  seri'e  mainly  for  the  storage 
of  furs  and  provisions,  and  the  large  crops  which 
are  gathered  from  the  farm.  A  distillery  near 
by,  where  the  Company  once  undertook  to  manu- 
facture their  liquor,  is  no  longer  used  for  that 
luirpose.  When  Assiniboia  is  made  a  colony, 
the  fort  may  be  bought  for  government  offices. 
One  Sunday  morning  I  had  the  pleasure  of 
accompanying  my  host  and  his  wife  to  the  church 
of  St.  Andrews,  of  which  Archdeacon  Hunter  is 
in  charge.  The  church  was  well  filled  :  the 
congregation  a  well-dressed  one — not  ditJ'ering 
greatly,  I  think,  from  one  which  might  be  seen 
in  any  countiT  village  irf  England,  since  it 
consisted,  in  tlie  bulk,  neither  of  French  half- 
breeds,  who  are  almost  always  Catholics,  nor 
of  Scotch,  who  worship  at  the  kirk,  but  mainly 
of  the  English  and  their  descendants :  together 
with  a  few  half-breeds  here  and  there,  Com- 
pany's sen-ants  and  officers,  a  retired  chief  trad- 
er and  fiictor  or  two,  and  on  the  walls  the  tablet 
of  one  who  had  lately  died. 
The  sketch  below  of  the  church  edifice,  in 
which  Archdeacon  Hunter  officiates,  may  give  p. 
faint  idea  of  its  appearance  and  situation.  It 
is,  perhaps,  the  neatest  building  in  Red  River. 
Constructed  of  limestone,  from  the  quarries 
near  at  hand,  the  stone  has  been  dressed  and 
piled  with  more  regard  to  architectural  rules 
than  any  other.  A  wall  of  the  same  kind  of 
stone  surrounds  the  church  and  the  grave-yard 
in  its  rear.  Its  position  upon  the  banks  of  the 
river  is  a  very  fine  one.  Standing  upon  its 
porch  one  ma}'  look  up  or  down  tlie  river  and 
see  the  neat  homes  and  farms  of  the  settlers, 
while  its  tasty  outlines  form  a  prominent  object 
in  the  landscape  to  those  gazing  upon  it  from 
either  direction. 
Dining  with  Thomas  Sinclair,  a  gentleman 
long  resident  at  Red  River,  I  learned  that  the 
Anson  Northvj)  was  not  the  first  boat,  though 
doubtless  the  first  steamboat  on  the  Red  River 
of  the  North.  In  the  back-ground  of  the  sketch 
of  Bishop  Anderson's  church,  there  is  to  be  seen 
the  roof  of  a  steam  mill — the  only  one  on  Red 
River.  The  machinery  of  this  mill,  which 
gi-inds  wheat  and  saws  logs  indiscriminately. 
Mr.  Sinclair  was  commissioned  to  transport 
from  St.  Paul  to  Fort  Garry.  The  perils  of  the 
land  transit  may  be  faintly  appreciated  by  one 
I  who  has  read  of  what  we  sufiered  in  our  less  dif- 
.  ficult   undertaking.      Probably   it   would   have 
been  still  more  diffi- 
cult to  carry  such 
heavy  loads  by  the 
plains.  This  he  did 
not  attempt  to  do,  but 
camjied  at  Graliam's 
Point,  two  miles  above 
Fovt  Abercronibie, 
and  there  made  a 
rude  boat  or  batteau. 
Noah's  ark  could  not 
have  served  its  ma- 
ker's purpose  better. 
Mr.  Sinclair's  boat  : 
was  55  feet  long,  and  ^-m 
I.^  feet  wide.  Unlike  ^ 
Noah,  Mr.  Sinclair 
had  no  oakum,  ]iitch, 
or  tar  wherewith  to 
calk  the  seams.  This 
seemed  to  balk  his 
hopes,  but  the  diffi- 
culty was  overcome 
by  using  basswood  and 
grooving  the  planks. 
They  were  so  green 
and  damp  that  water 
ran  ahead  of  the 
planer.  But  not  a  ■" 
drop  ran  into  the  boat 
when  they  were  put  to- 
gether, and  the  cargo 
^all  the  machinery 
of  an  engine  twenty- 
horse  power,  was  land- 
ed at  the  settlement 
in  safety.  Unless  the 
name  of  the  Indian 
who    first    dipped    a 
paddle  thei"e  can  be  ascertained  let  this  pass  as 
the  first  navigation  of  Red  Kiver.  i 
James  Sinclair,  the  brother  of  the  gentleman 
just  mentioned,  has  been  likely  to  lose  something 
TUB  Kuu:. 
ST.    AJ*DREW'a  OHCKOU. 
of  his  proper  fame.  It  is  claimed,  apparently 
on  good  authority,  that  he  first  discovered  the 
pass  through  the  Rocky  M(  untains,  now  named 
after  Captain  Palissior,  and  went  thiough  it 
three  several  times ; 
first,  in  ]  8-11  with  two 
families  of  emigrants; 
second,  in  1848  with 
seven  men  going  to 
California  ;  and  in 
185-t  with  his  own 
_  family,  and  a  num- 
ber of  cattle,  his  in- 
tention bciu;'  to  start 
a  stock  farm  in  Ore- 
gon. In  one  of  his 
journeys,  perhaps  the 
last,  the  jiarty  which 
he  led  were  compelled 
to  leave  their  carts  by 
the  roadside  on  this 
side  of  the  mountains, 
and  pack  their  stuff' 
thrangh.  These  carts 
were  seen  by  some 
of  Captain  PalissierV 
men,  and  indeed  used 
to  boil  their  tea  witli,  and  must  have  signified 
to  one  who  saw  them  that  tlie  pass  had  been  dis- 
covered and  used. 
Returning  toward  Fort  Garry  we  passed  the 
kirk,  which  is  the  phice  of  worsliip  of  the  old 
Scotch  settlers.  It  was  our  good  fortune  to  spend 
the  night  at  the  house  of  one  of  the  most  intelli- 
gent of  these,  Mr.  Donald  Murray,  of  Frog  Plain. 
He  had  been  personally  familiar  with  the  progress 
of  the  settlement  from  Lord  Selkirk's  time  till 
now,  and  entertained  us  till  long  past  midnight 
with  his  reminiscences.  The  Scotch  settlers, 
who  occupy  with  the  English  the  portion  of  the 
settlement  aronnd  Fort  Garry,  are  mostly  form- 
ers. They  may  send  hunters  to  the  plains  or 
pay  for  their  outfit,  but  themselves  rarely  go,  ex- 
cept for  pleasure.  They  are  by  far  the  most  so- 
ber and  industrious  class  of  the  conimunity,  and 
have  been  the  salt  which  has  saved  it  till  now. 
They  abide  in  the  old  ways.  The  majority  of 
the  English  residents  at  the  settlement,  together 
with  many  of  the  more  intelligent  half-breeds, 
worsliip  in  the  cliurch  of  which  a  sketcli  has  been 
given  above  (Archdeacon  Hnuter's),  or  in  that 
under  the  care  of  Bishop  Anderson,  given  below. 
The  bishop  was  absent  from  the  settlement  dur- 
ing our  visit,  and  we  did  not  have  the  pleasure 
of  seeing  or  hearing  him.  Tlie  half-breeds  and 
natives  are  for  the  most  part  Catholics,  and  their 
religious  services  are  held  in  the  large  cathedral 
of  St.  Boniface,  opposite  Fort  Garry.  The  Right 
Reverend  the  Bishopof  St.  Boniface,  in  the  colony 
of  Assiniboia,  gave  us  extremely  interesting  ac- 
counts of  the  religious  and  educational  establisli- 
ments  in  his  diocese.  Bishop  Taclie  has  him- 
self been  in  the  country  for  fifteen  years,  and  no 
unprejudiced  observer  can  fail  to  see  the  fruits  of 
his  industry  and  pious  zeal.  His  diocese  is  ini- 
♦lense,  and  the  care  of  the  missions  in  the  in- 
terior country  where  it  extends,  which  are  alto- 
gether heathen  missions,  is  no  small  part  of  his 
self-denying  and  laborious  work.  Besides  this, 
there  is  under  his  cliarge,  and  constituting  the 
more  engrossing  division  of  his  labor,  the  min- 
istration and  aid  afforded  to  tlie  Catholic  popu- 
lation of  Red  River  and  neigliborhood.  A  Cana- 
dian like  themselves,  their  brotlier,  therefore,  and 
their  friend,  no  outward  circumstances  restrict 
the  influence  which  his  character  and  high  office 
enable  him  to  e.xercise. 
There  are  four  parishes  in  Red  River — St. 
Boniface,  St.  Norbert,  St.  Francis  Xavier,  St. 
Charles.  St.  Boniface  includes  within  its  limits 
the  central  and  most  populous  jiart  of  the  settle- 
ment. JIgr.  J.  N.  Provencher  was  its  first  bishop, 
having  landed  at  Fort  Douglas  about  the  middle 
of  July,  1818.  In  two  years  was  laid  the  foun- 
dation of  the  first  religious  edifice  —  a  wooden 
clia|iel.  The  Clmrch  of  St.  Boniface,  Bishop 
Tache's  cathedral,  now  replaces  it. 
It  is,  perhaps,  the  finest,  certainly  the  most 
imposing  building  in  the  settlement.  It  is  100 
feet  in  length,  45  in  breadth,  and  40  in  height, 
not  reckoning  the  spire.  In  its  two  tinned  and 
airy  towers  is  a  fine  and  well-matched  ])eal  of 
three  bells,  weighing  upward  of  HJUO  pounds. 
In  the  rear  of  the  cathedral,  with  a  lower  roof,  is 
the  dwelling  of  the  bishop.  He  escorted  us,  by 
a  rear  entrance,  through  his  house  into  the  cathe- 
dral, on  the  occasion  of  our  first  visit  to  him,  and 
a  more  striking  surprise  could  not  have  been  pre- 
jiared  for  us.  "We  came  out  by  a  door  at  the 
side  of  the  altar,  and  there  suddenly  beheld  pil- 
lared aisles,  frescoed  roof,  and  all  the  gorgeous 
jjaraphernalia  with  which  the  Mother  Church 
solicits  and  attracts  her  communicants.  To  a 
nice  taste  the  eft'ect  might  have  seemed  a  little 
gaudy,  but  when  we  learned  that  the  Sisters  of 
Charity  and  some  of  the  Brothers  had  accom- 
plished these  decorations  without  aid  or  pattern, 
the  oftense  passed ;  for  piety  takes  rank  above 
taste,  or  else  what  excuse  have  we  for  the  bare 
walls,  the  stingy  paint,  to  say  nothing  of  the  beg- 
garly pinched  ceremonial  in  some  abodes  of  our 
enlightened  Protestant  worsliip  ?  Indeed,  of  a  Sun- 
day or  a  fete  day,  when  the  church  is  thronged ; 
when,  after  a  successful  hunt  and  safe  return,  the 
lialf-brceds  gather  to  the  cathedral  in  all  their 
fanciful  variety  of  dress,  their  brilliant  sashes, 
and  blue  or  white  capotes ;  the  dress  of  the  wo- 
men, too,  not  less  brilliantly  catching  the  eye, 
there  is  a  sense  of  harmony  gratified  by  this  like- 
ness and  general  prevalence  of  striking  colors, 
wliich  would  never  be  elicited  by  the  same  throngs 
in  a  country  meeting-house  in  New  England.  A 
tablet  in  the  wall  commemorates  the  piety  and 
labors  of  tlie  earliest  bishop. 
Bishop  Tache's  house  is  large,  and  he  shared 
it,  as  well  as  his  private  residence,  with  his  clergy, 
the  Brothers  of  his  schools,  and  some  orphans. 
Formerly  the  boys'  school  of  the  Brothers  of  the 
Christian  doctrine  was  kept  in  the  bishop's  house, 
but  for  a  year  or  two  now  tlicy  have  had  posses- 
sion of  the  building  erected  for  them  a  few  hun- 
dred feet  north  of  the  catliedral — seen  in  the 
sketch  above.  It  was  here  that  little  Joe  Rolette 
was  schooled,  and  as  the  tuition  is  very  low,  and 
in  some  cases  a  gift,  the  school  is  well  filled. 
The  scholars  are  examined  semi-annually,  and 
we  beard  the  most  creditable  reports  of  their  pro- 
ficiency in  reading,  writing,  arithmetic,  geogra- 
jjby,  grammar,  history,  sacred  and  secular,  alge- 
bra, etc.  The  sleeping  rooms  of  the  little  fel- 
lows were  bedsteadless,  but  bedsteads  were  a  lux- 
ury their  parents  were  used  to  go  without,  and 
they  enjoy  their  neat  piles  of  blankets  on  the  floor 
quite  as  well. 
The  convent  belonging  to  the  Sisters  of  Char- 
ity, known  in  Canada  as  the  Gray  Nuns,  is  in  the 
foreground  of  the  sketch  of  the  Cathedral  of  St. 
Bonitace.  It  is  to  the  south  of  the  cathedral, 
separated  from  it  by  a  well-cultivated  garden, 
tlirough  which,  when  we  passeij,  some  of  the  Sis- 
ters were  at  work,  assisting  and  directing  the  la- 
bors of  half  a  score  of  boys. 
We  were  indebted  to  Bishop  Tache  for  an  in- 
troduction to  the  lady  superior  of  the  convent, 
and  to  her  kindness  for  the  opportunity  of  exam- 
ining all  ])arts  of  it.  From  garret  to  cellar  it 
was  full  of  interest.  Tlie  building  itself  is  a 
very  spacious  one,  though  still  too  small  for  all 
its  uses.     A  large  chnpcl  was  being  erected  dur- 
ing  the  summer  of  our  visit,  and  as  the  settle- 
ment grows  other  adJitions  will  be  necessary. 
The  amount  of  work  done  and  of  good  accom- 
plished bj'  Sister  Valade  and  the  Gray  Nuns  un- 
der her  direction  is  something  remarkable.  The 
current  expenses  of  the  convent  are  defrayed  en- 
tirely by  the  proceeds  of  tlie  labors  of  the  nuns. 
In  the  garret  of  the  convent  we  were  shown  the 
spinning-wheels  witli  which  they  spin  the  mate- 
rial for  their  plain  gray  gowns,  woven  also  by 
their  own  hand.  Their  fine  garden,  too,  they 
till.  The  more  accomplished  among  them  give 
their  leisure  to  fine  embroideries  and  rich  needle- 
work, sold  to  visitors,  or  sent  to  Canada  for  sale. 
They  board  twenty  or  thirty  girls,  and,  for  com- 
jiensation,  give  them  an  education  beyond  that  of 
most  district  schools  in  the  United  States.  The 
languages  used  are  English  and  French,  and  the 
subjects  principally  taught  are  reading,  spelling, 
the  catechism,  grammar,  sacred  history,  arith- 
metic, geography,  English  history,  Canadian  his- 
tory, ancient  mythology,  vocal  mnsic,  and  the 
piano-forte,  as  well  as  tlie  doctrines  and  prac- 
tices of  the  Catholic  religion.  Besides  keeping 
a  day-school  for  all  the  little  girls  of  the  parish 
desirous  of  instruction,  they  maintain  and  edu- 
cate in  a  separate  ajiartment  fifteen  or  twenty 
|->oor  orphan  girls,  without  charge  to  any  one  ex- 
cept themselves.  Nor  is  this  the  sum  of  their 
labors ;  they  minister  to  the  sick  or  afflicted  of 
the  parish  unweariedly,  and  by  their  example  of 
charity,  industry,  and  economy,  have  wrought  a 
perceptible  change  in  the  character  of  that  class 
jf  the  population  over  whom  their  care  extends. 
The  neatness  and  order  of  the  convent  was 
apparent  in  every  part.  The  uncarpoted  floors 
were  not  waxed,  but  not  an  atom  of  dust  lin- 
gered ujjon  them.  The  kitchen  was  as  neat  as 
a  New  England  housewife's  after  the  morning's 
work  is  done,  and  when  the  sun  lies  on  the 
Huor  and  lights  up  the  polished  tins.  Even  the 
garret,  where  every  thing  was  stowed,  was  in  an 
orderly  litter. 
The  lady  superior  conversed  with  ns  only  in 
French,  undefiled  by  the  Canadian  patois ;  but 
one  of  the  nuns,  whom  no  visitor  several  years 
ago  to  the  Montreal  convent  has  forgotten,  and 
whose  beauty  nor  tlie  attraction  of  the  world 
lias  turned  aside  from  her  life  of  self-denial  and 
hidden  labor,  conversed  with  us  in  English,  and 
left  us  without  information  on  no  point  that  we 
desired  to  know.  After  a  general  conversation 
in  the  large  reception-room  of  the  convent,  hung 
with  portraits  of  the  bishops  and  of  saints,  and 
decorated  with  specimens  of  the  handiwork  of 
the  nuns,  and  having  also  in  one  of  its  corners 
a  sewing-machine  of  Wheeler  and  Wilson's  pat- 
ent, this  beautiful  mm  conducted  us  to  the  mu- 
sic-room, and  there  entertained  us  with  polkas, 
redowas,  and  marches,  played  by  the  more  ac- 
complished of  the  pupils.  Strange  sounds  these ; 
to  us,  flashes  of  the  world,  forsaken  for  nionlhs 
in  the  midst  of  its  hurry  and  gayety,  its  life  of 
cities  and  operas  and  art  and  trade  and  jiarades, 
its  ])omp  and  wealth  and  show; — to  these  Gray 
Nuns,  dull  gleams,  perhaps,  of  an  outer  world,  I 
resigned  and  forsaken  for  all  the  years  of  their 
lives. 
In  other  rooms  we  listened  to  recitations, 
singing  of  the  older  and  younger  ones,  heard 
the  quick,  bright  answers  of  little  half-breeds, 
recognizing  the  painted  block  letters  which  hold 
the  knowledge  and  wisdom  of  the  world ;  saw 
them  march  about  the  room  in  lock  step,  hymn- 
ing nursery  rhymes ;  listened  to  the  story  of  one 
poor  Indian  girl  left  by  her  sa\age  parents  on 
the  prairie  to  starve  and  die,  a  rope  tied  about 
her,  cutting  into  her  tender  flesh  and  wearing 
away  her  life,  but  saved  in  her  last  horns  for  a 
longer  and  better  life  here ;  saw  and  heard 
other  things  of  like  tenor  and  character,  too 
numerous  to  mention  in  these  ciowded  pages, 
and  left  the  convent  with  the  benediction  of  the 
nuns.  We,  Christians  of  another  name,  were 
thankful  that,  although  on  another  continent, 
he  whom  they  called  father  we  called  Anti- 
christ, here,  at  least,  charity  and  the  good 
works  of  a  Christianity  inspired  elsewhere  than 
at  Rome,  and  at  sources  long  forsaken  by  the 
successors  of  St.  Peter,  were  making  their  se- 
cure and  noiseless  way. 
In  the  parishes  of  St.  Norbert,  St.  Francis 
Xavier,  and  St.  Charles,  there  are  also  schools 
for  boys  and  girls,  nnder  the  charge  of  the  pas- 
tor and  the  Sisters  of  Charity ;  in  the  first  31 
boys  .and  20  girls,  and  in  the  second  13  boys  and 
L'tl  girls.  The  population  ministered  to  in  St. 
Boniface  parish  is  1400;  in  the  other  three,  the 
first  two  having  each  a  chapel,  a  little  more  than 
2000.  At  the  extremity  of  Lake  Manitoba  there 
is  still  another  chapel,  for  the  convenience  of 
thirty  or  forty  families. 
Let  it  be  remembered  that  here  there  is  no 
law  and  no  general  jn-ovision  for  education ;  that 
the  bouses  for  the  most  part  are  .sparse,  that  the 
jiarents  are  careless  and  indifferent,  and  that, 
though  the  charge  for  education  is  but  ten  shil- 
lings a  year,  scarcely  one  child  in  ten  pays  for 
his  schooling,  while  to  insist  on  payment  would 
drive  two-thirds  away. 
There  are  seventeen  schools  in  the  settlement, 
generally  under  the  supervision  of  the  ministers 
of  the  denomination  to  which  they  belong.  The 
parochial  school  of  Archdeacon  Hunter,  nnder 
the  charge  of  a  gentleman  from  Dublin  ;  Mr. 
Gunn's  commercial  boarding-school,  whose  schol- 
ars are,  the  most  of  them,  the  children  of  Pres- 
byterians ;  the  Kev.  Messrs.  Black,  Taylor,  and 
Chapman's  schools ;  and  three  minor  schools, 
under  the  supervision  of  the  Episcopal  ministers 
in  difl'erent  i>arishes  besides  those  above  mention- 
ed, are  the  most  important  of  tliem. 
The  Indian  church,  at  the  lower  end  of  the 
settlement,  is  one  of  the  peculiar  features  of  Red 
River.  It  is  mostly  attended  by  O.iibbeway  In- 
dians, whose  behavior  is  attentive  and  decorous. 
The  singing,  in  which  the  soft,  low  voices  of  the 
Indian  women  join,  led  by  a  melodeon  ])layed  by 
the  wife  of  the  minister,  is  very  sweet.  The 
prayers  were  read  in  English,  the  lessons  in  Ojib- 
beway,  and  the  sermon  in  Cree. 
Ml'.  Cowlev   the  minister,  is  not  onlv  a  mis- 
B16U0P  A^UEUbUiNj'B  OUUBOU. 
sionaiy,  but  also  physician,  judpe,  arbitrator, 
and  adviser  of  the  Indians.  Wlien  the  Indians 
require  liis  services  as  doctor  during  tlie  night, 
they  quietly  enter  tlie  parsonage  door,  ■wliicli  is 
never  locked,  make  their  way  in  the  darkest  night 
to  the  well-known  stove-pipe  leading  from  the  sit- 
ting-room into  his  bedroom  above,  give  two  or 
three  low  Indian  taps,  and  quietly  await  the  result. 
Ko  one  wotdd  doubt  the  value  of  these  mis- 
sions among  the  Indians  who  could  see  the 
contrast  between  those  who  have  become  Chris- 
tianized and  otliers  who  have  not.  Mr.  Daw- 
sen  tells  of  disgusting  dog  feasts  and  medicine 
dances  held  by  prairie  tribes  on  a  Sunday,  while 
he  was  there,  within  a  mile  and  a  half  of  their 
Christian  altars.  The  next  Sunday  after  leav- 
ing the  settlement  we  spent  at  Pembina,  and 
there  witnessed  a  begging  dance,  and  heard  a 
begging  oration  from  an  Indian  orator.  Not  so 
disgusting,  to  be  sure,  as  a  dog  feast,  but  still 
sufficiently  in  contrast  with  the  Sabbath  rest 
which  we  had  enjoyed  the  week  before. 
The  po])idation  in  Mr.  Cowley's  mission  con- 
sists of  about  500  baptized  Indians  and  203 
heathen. 
The  relative  proportion  of  these  several  classes 
is  fairly  shown  in  the  census  list  of  18.ti;,  where 
the  families  are  numbered  as  follows,  according 
to  their  origin  : 
Rupert's  Land,  half-breeds  and  native? Sir, 
Scolland HI! 
Can.-ula 92 
Kngland 40 
Ireland  13 
Switzerland 2 
Norway 1 
The  total  population  of  the  settlements  on  tin' 
Red  Kiver  and  the  Assiniboine,  in  that  year, 
amounted  to  6523.  Including  those  of  Pem- 
bina, St.  Joseph,  and  vicinity,  and  making  al- 
lowance for  the  natural  increase  since  the  cen- 
sus was  taken,  it  is  probable  that  the  number 
now  reaches  nearly  8000.  There  is  a  very  dis- 
tinct and  well-preserved  difference  in  faith  be- 
tween the  population  of  the  different  parishes 
into  which  the  settlements  arc  divided.  Some 
are  almost  exclusively  Protestant ;  others  equal- 
ly Roman  Catholic.  In  the  last  ten  years  there 
has  been  a  considerable  emigration  of  young  men 
to  the  States  and  Canada ;  so  that  while  in  1849 
there  were  137  more  males  than  females  in  the 
settlement,  there  were  in  18.")G  seventy-three  more 
females  than  males.    . 
The  census  roll  of  Red  River  has  one  curious 
blank  in  its  pages.  It  has  no  enumeration  of 
trades  and  occupations.  Almost  every  man  is 
his  own  carpenter,  house-builder,  wheel-wright, 
blacksmith,  and  all  are  either  small  farmers  or 
hunters.  Rock,  suitable  for  grindstones,  lies 
almost  under  their  feet,  but  they  for  years  have 
used  those  imported  by  the  Hudson's  Bay  Com- 
])any.  Their  pottery,  too,  is  imjiorted.  There 
are  about  sixteen  wind-mills,  and  half  as  many 
water-mills.  The  only  steam  (saw  and  grist) 
mill  in  the  valley,  which,  as  before  said,  stood 
idle  wliile  a  rip-saw  was  dragged  through  heavy 
timbers  under  its  very  eaves,  was  burned  down 
last  Juno,  the  loss  amounting  to  X1600  ;  so  end- 
ing another  enterprise,  with  a  fatality  whicli 
seems  to  have  been  common  wherever  the  pco- 
OLD  MILL  (ONOE  IN  FOKT  DOUGLAB). 
pie  of  the  settlement  have  attempted  to  over- 
i^ome  the  general  stagnation.  A  model  farm 
was  once  attempted  there  to  show  the  native 
farmers  what  science  applied  to  agriculture 
could  accomplish.  Mismanagement  jiroduced 
a  miserable  failure.  Tlie  exploits  of  a  Buffalo 
Wool  Company  are  only  remembered  to  be  pit- 
ied ;  the  sheep  and  tallow  schemes,  and  the  ag- 
ricultural associations  attempted,  have  likewise 
fallen  through  ;  and  a  fulling-mill  com])letes  the 
cast  of  abortive  enterprises.  Another  steam- 
mill,  however,  will  soon  re])lace  the  old  one. 
The  supplies  of  the  Red  River  peojjle  were 
formerly  imported  for  them  through  Hudson's 
Bay,  at  high  charges,  by  the  Company;  but 
with  the  growth  of  our  Western  settlements, 
wliich  are  extended  almost  to  northernmost 
Minnesota,  they  have  been  able  to  obtain  them 
directly  from  the  United  States,  which  they  vis- 
ited in  huge  caravans,  or  through  the  traders 
who  themselves  visit  St.  Paul.  The  principal 
American  traders  are  Norman  W.  Kittson,  who 
has  done  more  than  any  one  else  to  open  tlie 
trade,  and  J.  W.  Burbank  and  Co.,  now  the 
proprietors  in  part  of  the  Anso7i  Northup. 
These  facts,  and  the  immense  extent  of  front- 
ier not  easily  governed  by  custom-house  regu- 
lations, will   account  for  the  large  number  of 
merchant  shops  (fifty-six)  enumerated  in  the  last 
censns. 
Mr.  Kittson's  store,  whidi  has  a  fine  position 
near  the  cathedral,  and  ojiposite  Fort  Garry,  is 
very  like  other  Yankee  country  stores;  but  in 
those  of  the  minor  or  native  traders  the  object 
seems  to  be  to  conceal  rather  than  display  their 
goods. 
Besides  the  merchants,  there  is  another  class, 
called  freighters,  who  row  the  heavy  Mackinaw 
boats,  and  haul  them  and  their  loads  over  the 
portages  between  York  Factory  and  Ked  River. 
There  were  fifty-five  of  these  boats  enumerated 
in  the  last  census ;  on  the  next  they  will  liave 
become  much  diminished,  from  the  change  in 
the  route  of  importation,  although  in  the  sup- 
plying of  the  northwestern  districts  some  will  be 
as  indispensable  as  ever.  The  employment  of 
Indians  by  the  freighters  was  a  matter  of  special 
prohibition  only  a  few  years  ago,  as  introducing 
a  kind  of  industry  not  compatible  with  hunting, 
and  likely  to  direct  attention  from  the  fur  trade. 
The  shrewd  reader  may  here  see  some  clew  to 
many  mysterious  facts  in  the  condition  of  the . 
Red  River  settlement,  and  of  the  Indian  mis- 
sions here  and  elsewhere  in  Ru])ert's  Land. 
The  tenure  of  land  in  Assiniboia  is  singular. 
It  is  sometimes  sold  to  purchasers  at  7s.  Qd.  ster- 
ling  per  acre,  the  title  beinf;  conveyed  under  the 
form  of  a  lease  for  999  years.  Tliere  are  half  a 
dozen  conditions  in  the  lease  saving  the  inter- 
ests, and  profits,  and  control  of  the  Company, 
which  has  been  generally  enforced.  The  con- 
dition that  one-tenth  of  the  land  should  be 
brought  under  cultivation  in  five  years  is  ob- 
served or  not,  as  may  happen.  In  very  many 
instances  among  the  half-breed  settlers,  they  did 
not  know  the  number  of  their  lots,  the  ground 
of  their  tenure,  and  had  no  document  from  the 
Company  or  any  other  authority.  Some  had 
paid,  some  had  received  land  for  services,  some 
had  squatted  and  were  never  disturbed,  others 
had  received  it  as  a  present  from  Sir  George 
Simpson ;  and  now,  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
settlement  on  the  river,  no  new  squatter  has 
any  thing  to  pay. 
The  northward  deflection  of  isothermals  as 
you  pass  west  of  the  gi'eat  lakes,  and  toward 
the  west  coast  of  the  continent,  is  a  fact  well 
known.  Red  River  nobody  supposes  to  be  as 
cold  as  Labrador.  It  finds  its  parallel  in  the 
climates  of  the  interior  districts  of  Northern 
Europe  and  Asia.  The  summer  temperature  is 
high  ;  the  winter  cold  and  severe.  There  is  a 
plenty  of  rain  in  the  summer  months,  a  general 
absence  of  late  spring  and  early  autumn  frosts. 
Professor  Hind  found,  in  18.55-'56,  the  summer 
of  Red  River  four  degrees  warmer  than  that  of 
Toronto,  with  21-74  inches  of  rain  in  favor  of 
.  Red  River. 
The  natural  division  of  the  seasons  for  the 
climate  of  Red  River  is  as  follows : 
Summer. — June,  July,  and  August. 
Autumn. — September  and  October. 
Winter.  —  November,  December,  January. 
February,  and  March. 
Sfirimj. — April  and  May. 
The  summer  temperature  and  the  absence 
of  frosts  determine  its  fitness  for  agricultural 
purposes,  and  the  splendid  crops  are  the  proof 
thereof. 
The  clear,  dry  atmosphere  renders  innocuous 
the  very  cold  weather  of  winter,  The  half- 
breeds  camp  out  on  the  plains,  with  only  a  few 
blankets  and  robes.  Indian  com  is  a  sure  croji 
on  the  dry  points  of  the  Assiniboine  and  Red 
River,  the  horse-teeth  and  Mandan  com  being 
the  kinds  most  cultivated. 
"Wheat  is  the  staple  crop  in  the  settlement. 
Forty  bushels  to  the  acre  is  a  common  return  on 
new  land,  and  in  some  cases  the  yield  has  been 
between  fifty  and  sixty  bushels.  The  grasshop- 
pers, which  have  several  times  eaten  up  cverj- 
green  thing,  are  its  only  enemies. 
Of  bay  the  quantity  is  unlimited,  and  the 
quality  excellent.  Hops  grow  every  where  wild, 
and  with  the  greatest  luxuriance.  Pease  grow 
wild,  and  the  yield  is  large.  Potatoes  are  sur- 
passed in  size  and  quality  by  none  that  we  arc 
accustomed  to  find  in  Washington  Market. 
All  kinds  of  root-crops  grow  well,  and  attain 
large  dimensions ;  and  all  the  garden  vegetable'- 
which  grow  well  in  Canada  and  Northern  New 
York  flourish  better  in  Assiniboine. 
Flax,  hemp,  and  tobacco  are  cultivated  to 
some  extent,  the  want  of  a  market  alone  pre- 
VIKW    NEAR  iOKt  OARKV. 
Js^     A 
\     V 
■'^=*'«K, 
OTTKR  TAIT.  TO   (IROW    WINO. 
venting  the  first  two  from  becoming  most  valu- 
able cx|iorts. 
Melons  are  cultivated  in  some  of  the  gardens 
of  tlic  settlement  with  wonderful  suceess ;  and 
the  kitcJien  gardens  of  the  Koyal  Canadian  l!i- 
fles  at  Fort  Garry,  and  of  the  Sisters  of  Charity 
over  the  river,  would  deserve  prizes  at  an  Illi- 
nois State  Fair. 
The  limitless  prairies  environing  the  settle- 
ment are  fragrant  with  the  perfume  of  a  thou- 
sand (lowers  ;  and  in  the  thickets  and  long  grass 
arc  strawberries,  raspberries,  sakatome  berries, 
.  gooseberries,  and  prunes. 
After  remaining  a  week  or  more  in  the  settle- 
ment, the  changing  of  the  weather,  which  was 
now  beginning  to  have  something  of  the  chilli- 
ness of  antumn,  and  the  departure  of  the  last 
trains  of  the  half-breeds,  made  us  think  more  in- 
tently of  returning.  One  mild  September  after- 
noon, therefore,  having  first  crossed  the  Stygian 
ferry,  whereof  the  Charcm  is  no  Yankee,  and 
bade  adieu  to  friends  at  the  fort,  and  to  the 
bishop,  and  to  Kittson  and  Cavalier,  border-set- 
tlers who  have  begun  to  save  the  province  from 
itself,  and  have  also  rescued  Joe  Uoletto  from 
his  enemies,  wo  'en.tnded  ourselves  to  the  life 
which  we  had  left,  and  them  all  to  their  annu- 
al hibernation.  We  reached  John  Dace's  by 
nightfall,  and,  the  house  being  full,  sjircad  our 
blankets  on  the  floor  of  his  kee]iing-r(iom,  and 
slejit  till  morning.  The  next  day  Josejih  and  I 
bestrode  our'horses,  turned  their  heads  south- 
ward, and  with  a  smart  gallop  soon  left  the 
last  house  of  the  settlement  bidden  behind  the 
billowy  prairie  grass,  as  the  rounding  waves 
iiide  the  ships  at  sea.  Before  its  chimney-pot 
had  gone  down,  however,  Joseph  turned  on  the 
river  bank,  rose  in  his  stirrups,  and  apostro- 
phized the  settlement  in  a  manner  which,  as  1 
stood  and  listened,  brought  tears  to  my  eyes  and 
a  hanilkercbief  to  my  nose.  If  the  thermometer 
had  been  firther  from  32°  Fahrenheit  not  even 
the  orator  would  have  suspected  the  sincerity  of 
my  emotion.  That  day  we  traveled  fifty-four 
miles,  reaching  I'embina  after  dark,  exhausted, 
and  feeling  as  if  bifurcation  had  attained  its 
maximum.  The  next  day  Joe  Rolette  came; 
he,  too,  certain,  for  twenly-four  hours  after  di* 
mounting,  that  the  earth  had  ceased  to  rotate, 
but  performed  its  journey  around  the  sun  with 
hard  trotting  on  a  macad.ami/,cd  orbit. 
At  Pembina  we  made  our  final  preparations 
for  a  solita.y  journey  across  t!ic  country  to  Crow 
Wing,  on  oni;  of  the  iijjiier  tributaries  of  tlie  Mis- 
sissippi, liearing  tlie  same  name.  TliePeniljina 
postmaster  —  for  even  liere  the  American  Bri- 
areus  extends  one  of  his  finger  tips,  and  sorts 
the  mails — concluded  to  accompany  us,  and  by 
waiting  for  him  benevolently  a  day,  we  were  re- 
warded by  a  month's  later  mails,  wliich  came 
pi^  in  tima  not  to  be  too  late,  with  letters  from 
lionie  and  friends,  and  news  of  the  world  with- 
out, whoso  attractive  force,  in  sjjito  of  Kejiler 
and  Faraday,  was  in  the  ratio  of  the  square  of 
the  distance. 
One  busy  Jlonday  morning,  on  the  10th  of 
September,  after  a  rainy  Sunday,  we  ferried  our- 
selves over  the  Red  River  of  the  North,  swim- 
ming the  horses,  dragged  our  cart  up  its  steep 
and  muddy  bank,  and  soon  left  the  waters 
gleaming  red  in  every  wave  under  the  bright 
sunshine,  as  it  swept  on  to  tlie  frozen  seas,  far 
behind  us. 
The  cart  was  light,  the  lioi-ses  pretty  well 
rested,  and  the  law  of  the  inverse  ratio  began  to 
operate,  so  tliat  a  dog-trot  became  even  Dan 
Rice's  habitual  gait.  Twenty-five  miles  were 
put  behind  us  the  first  day,  and  we  came  to 
camp  by  twilight  on  the  wooded  banks  of  a  beau- 
tiful river.  Roumling  its  curve  we  came  in  sight 
of  a  camp-fire,  around  which  were  huddled  three 
Red  Lake  Indians — a  fiither  and  his  two  sons. 
We  fraternized  directly,  amazing  them  witli  a 
prodigal  gift  of  tea,  and  saved  the  trouble  of 
cooking  our  supper  by  being  invited  to  share 
their  huge  kettle  of  boiled  ducks.  As  far  as  we 
could  learn  they  had  supped  twice  already,  but 
this  did  not  prevent  them  from  eating  a  third 
time.  The  old  man,  in  the  abundance  of  his 
hospitality,  even  tore  strips  from  the  sheet  of 
white  bark,  whicli  was  all  tlieir  shelter  from  the 
wind,  to  make  torclies  for  us,  twisting  tlie  stri]) 
iuto  a  roll,  impaling  it  diagonally  on  a  stick 
thrust  in  the  ground,  and  ligliting  its  upper  end. 
The  engorgement  of  the  red-skins  convinced  us 
of  their  honesty  for  the  night,  and  we  all  slept 
with  both  eyes  shut ;  and  when  we  waked  in  the 
morning  and  found  two  of  our  four  horses  gone, 
we  accused  only  the  quadrupeds  of  theft.  We 
scoured  the  woods  and  the  ])rairies  in  vain,  and 
finally  set  the  Indians  on  the  hunt,  ourselves 
watching  by  the  camp.  The  red  leaves  of  au- 
tumn, like  flakes  of  blood,  drifted  down  from  the 
branches  of  the  trees,  and  floated  away  on  the 
1  surface  of  the  stream.  The  soft  whirr  of  the 
wings  of  ducks  alighting  or  flying  was  a  foil  to 
the,  solemn  stillness  in  whicli  the  ungathercd 
harvests  fell  before  the  silent  sickle  of  the  wind, 
and  the  pomp  and  summer  glory  of  the  year 
made  ready  for  its  winter  shroud. 
Before  night  one  of  the  horses  bad  been  found, 
►and  the  next  afternoon  an  Indian  messenger  re- 
turned with.another  from  Pembina  in  lieu  of  the 
one  lost.  We  loaded  our  carts  and  traveled  on 
for  a  few  miles,  camping  beside  a  huge  marsh. 
Two  or  three  hours  before  daylight  the  post- 
master awoke  by  chance,  and  aroused  us  with 
the  cry  of  ' '  Prairie  on  fire ! "    At  the  west  of  us 
the  wliole  sky  was  lit  up  with  lurid  fire.  Great 
surging  billows  of  smoke  swelled  u])  against  the 
black,  starless  sky,  their  under  sides  reddened  all 
over  with  the  reflection  from  the  flames  below. 
The  wind  was  blowirjg  almost  directly  upon  us, 
and  we  could  feel  the  gusts  of  hot  wind  every 
moment  alternating  with  the  cool  night  breeze. 
It  was  easy  to  see  that  the  fire  was  gaining  upon 
us  rapidly.  While  we  stood  gazing  the  swift 
flames  had  come  so  fast  and  far  that  we  could 
already  see  their  fiery  tips  flickering  above  the 
green  grass,  a  long  advancing  line  stretching  far 
away  to  the  northward.  Every  moment  the  de- 
vouring lips  came  nearer,  and  lifted  themselves 
higher,  and  the  huge  molten  billows  swept  on 
toward  us  in  vast  volume  and  solid  jihalanx,  as 
if  to  ingulf  us  and  plunge  us  in  the  conflagra- 
tion below.  There  was  no  time  to  be  lost.  We 
found  the  horses,  that  were  all  standing  fas- 
cinated by  the  glare,  and  beginning  to  tremble 
with  c.Kcitemcnt  and  fright,  harnessed  and  sad- 
dled them,  turned  their  heads  to  the  south, 
obliquely  away  from  the  direction  of  the  wind, 
and  at  the  end  of  an  hour's  fast  riding  were  past 
the  limit  of  its  southernmost  line. 
Red  Lake  River  is  the  largest  of  the  tributaries 
of  Red  River,  excepting  only  the  Assiniboine. 
Indeed  it  bears  the  same  relation  to  the  Red  River 
above  its  mouth  as  the  Missouri  to  tlie  Upper  Mis- 
sissippi. It  is  itself  the  main  stream.  AVe  came 
to  its  banks  one  afternoon,  at  the  sjjot  figured  in 
the  sketch  below,  dined,  and  then  attempted  the 
passage.  The  water  was  high,  and  the  river 
wide.  By  wading  it  on  horseback  we  soon  found 
the  easiest  s]iot  to  cross.  It  was  necessary  to 
enter  the  stream  from  a  projecting  spit  of  land, 
make  head  against  its  current  for  a  few  rods, 
then  turn  where  the  deep  channel  was  narrow- 
est, wade  through  it,  and  keep  on  a  long,  shal- 
low bar  to  the  ojjposite  shore.  The  force  of  the 
current  in  the  deepest  part  was  more  than  any 
but  a  strong  man  could  stand -against,  and  even 
over  the  shallow  bar,  to  wade,  was  like  forcing 
one's  legs  through  dry  sand. 
We  emptied  the  cart,  laid  bars  on  the  top, 
piled  our  goods  and  chattels  upon  them,  weight- 
ing the  upper  side  so  that  the  current  might  not 
tij)  the  cart  over,  and,  one  of  ns  standing  upon 
the  same  side,  with  Dan  Riee  harnessed  between 
tlie  shafts,  we  entered  the  water.  With  coax- 
ing and  tluasliing  and  shoving,  Dan  was  induced 
to  jnill  the  cart  up  stream  as  far  as  the  turning 
jioint,  where  we  were  to  cross  the  deep  channel. 
Feeling  the  force  of  the  water  against  his  legs, 
sideways,  here,  and  anxious  probably  for  bis 
equine  equilibrium,  not  another  step  would  he 
budge,  though  we  besought,  and  pulled,  and  so- 
licited, and  shoved,  and  thrashed,  and  dragged 
him,  as  we  three  best  could,  on  horseback  or  up 
to  armpit  in  the  cold  water.  It  was  of  no  use ; 
Dan  could  not  or  would  not  go  on :  there  was 
nothing  left,  therefore,  but  to  drive  him  back, 
and  try  one  of  the  other  horses.  But  return  was 
as  bad  as  to  go  o'er.  The  obstinate  brute  would 
move  in  no  direction,  and  for  aught  we  could 
see  seemed  willing  to  stand  in  his  tracks  till  tlie 
POEDINO  BEI>  L\Kr  P.I\-EE. 
waters  had  washed  liim,  fiiecemcal,  from  off  llic 
face  of  the  earth.  We  all  then  jnmped  into  tlic 
water,  unharnessed  the  balky  WTCtcli,  backed 
the  cart  down  the  stream  to  the  shore,  and  led 
Dan  out.  The  other  horses  failed  from  sheer 
weakness.  Each  did  his  best,  but  got  no  further 
than  Dan  had  tried  to  go.  Indeed  a  little  black 
horse  came  nearer  drowning  than  swimming.  The 
current  knocked  out  his  legs  from  under  him,  and 
had  not  Joseph  lifted  his  nose  above  water  by 
jumping  on  the  hinder  end  of  the  cart,  we  should 
hare  had  four  legs  the  less  to  get  home  with. 
The  afternoon  was  already  more  than  half 
gone ;  the  horses  too  tired  to  be  ridden  back  and 
forth  through  the  water  any  longer  with  safety  ; 
and  Joseph,  not  in  good  health,  had  already  ex- 
ceeded prudence ;  so  it  only  remained  for  the 
postmaster  and  myself  to  shoulder  our  bags  and 
boxes  and  ferry  them  over  bipedally.  Superflu- 
ities had  no  chance  of  transportation — that  tcr- 
rible  strain  upon  the  muscles  could  be  endured 
onlv  for  what  was  necessary  to  take  us  to  civiliz- 
ation again,  bo  that  it  was  only  for  guns,  pem- 
mican,  blankets,  and  frying-pans,  and  not  at  all 
for  dressing-cases,  stecl-p^n  coats,  and  French 
rairrors  that  we  terebratcd  the  stony  bottom  of 
the  river  with  our  great  toes  and  blistered  the 
soles  of  our  feet.  Last  of  all  we  took  the  cart  to 
pieces,  and  with  a  long  rope,  of  which  we  both 
had  hold,  floated  over  successively  the  box  and 
wheels.  One  feathcr's-wcight  more  must  have 
swept  OS  down  the  river. 
OTTEB  TACL  OiTY. 
In  two  or  three  clays  more  of  rapid  travel, 
crossing  Sand  Hill,  Rice,  and  Butfalo  rivers,  we 
reached  the  Leaf  Mountains,  seen  at  the  north 
of  us  when  we  were  near  Osakis  Lake,  left  two 
more  of  our  horses  exhausted  on  the  way ;  and 
at  the  end  of  another  day's  journey  came  to  De- 
troit Lake,  a  fine  sheet  of  water,  skirted  by  a 
noble  forest.  The  trail  led  us  for  twelve  miles 
through  its  delightful  shade.  We  loaded  our 
cart  with  pigeons  and  ])artridges,  shot  en  passmil, 
discarding  here  the  last  of  our  pemmican,  and  the 
next  noon  dined  at  Otter  Tail  City,  the  whole  of 
which  is  seen  in  the  cut  above.  Six  miles  fur- 
ther on  we  came  to  Leaf  City  (houses  one,  popu- 
lation one),  slept  within  four  walls,  rested  a  day 
while  the  rain  poured,  and  on  the  1st  day  of  Oc- 
tober, through  sloughs  innumerable  and  fathom- 
less, came  to  the  Crow  Wing  crossing— a  rope 
ferry  over  the  river  of  the  name — from  which 
there  was  continuous  water,  not  to  Arctic,  but 
to  Tropic  seas  and  the  Atlantic. 
One  more  day's  journey  brought  us  to  the 
"Agency,"  where  two  or  three  thousand  Chip- 
pewa Indians  were  assembled  to  receive  their 
annual  payment ;  and  to  Crow  Wing,  a  thriving 
village  on  the  Mississippi,  just  below  the  junc- 
tion of  the  Crow  Wing  River,  whence  stages, 
steamboats,  and  railway  cars,  soon  carried  us  to 
1  our  respective  homes. 
I  have  just  space  to  append  a  few  statistical 
items  :  Four  years  ago  the  Red  River  Settlement 
contained 
Houses 933  Churches 9 
Stablea 1232  Shop?,  etoro9,  etc 56 
Baina 399  Schools IT 
— making  2G35  buildings  in  all. 
The  live  stock  is  as  follows : 
Horses 1503  Cows 3693 
Stares 1396  Calves 
Oxen 272B  Pigs 
Bulls 290  Sheep 
Of  these  there  were  lost,  during  the  winter  of 
18u3-'o6,  16  horses,  3  mares,  21  o.xen,  16  cows, 
43  sheep,  57  calves,  2S  pigs. 
The  implements  of  the  settlers  curiously  indi- 
cate their  habits : 
Plows SSBCanoes 522 
llaiTows 730  Boats 6S 
Carts 2075; 
There  are  nearly  1G,000  acres  of  land  under 
cultivation. 
The  machinery  in  use  in  the  settlement  is 
very  little,  and  mostly  turned  by  natural  forces. 
"Wind-mills 16  Cnrding-mills 1 
Wnter-mill'i DlThrashing-milla 8 
Winuowiug-macliiues . .  .     6, Reaping-machines 2 
The  average  value  of  dwellings,  linstock,  im- 
plements, and  machinery,  is  reckoned  as  fol- 
lows : 
nwellings :£49,260 
Linstock 53,401 
Implements 5998 
Machinery 337T 
Total Hlirosij 
The  grand  total  value  of  all  that  is  above  the 
soil  of  Red  River  then  remaining  at  a  little  over 
half  a  million  dollars,  exclusive  of  the  Com- 
pany's forts  and  provisions. 
2644 
4674 
2429 
.^' 
^^  ,>^<'---.%^  ^-v.-,\^  :m=^^  -^'^^^^^  - 
\v  'O.    '0.1.-.  \v  <_^     '0.).", 
%- 
^^0^ 
•vCl  o^ 
»*'- 
,\.^^*■ 
V  •  0  ^      -^ 
^^^°- 
■\..*^ 
0^     -^^fe"-  %-o'     " 
sy' .^'o,  9p  "'^   v^.-o,  %°*^   v\^»^-°..%         ^\^:^°'.'%     .^-^kj,^-'^      <.  ^>' 
\/     v^r.^\/     o\f,^^/    V'-'^%N^^  ,.0  V'-^*  v^^\>'«.%>"-^^v^^l 
"^^< 
A<^  ^  ^ ' . .  >.  ^  pA"     . .     <;, 
1  -^ 
^A. 
i  .^  °^ 
.\/     V'„".V\/      o^°':\%\/     V'»-*\^^      V'"-^'vN*       V"-^'>  .. 
'.<"''  c?^^:;l'^%■"•~  cP^^::l:.%^^:  co\.--.>^'-"^  o^y^^'^%'"\  ^""y^^^S. 
.f 
t^  o,. 
>^    .  >   •  0 
.^  °- 
o.N'' 
f^  %. 
'^  ..■ 
^^J^^ 
%^^ 
='-"«. 
■".   e-^^  -1  „<iy  _    .   '^.  *   •»   JOS'  _,    . 
1  -•     ■■         cS>   ^ 
* 
A, 
<- 
X.*^ 
??>^ 
.#        95,''..-.; 
v^ 
■^.<^ 
.**•' 
%. 
''  \.^^-  .^ 
v^' 
\,<^' 
^°V^>L^'^^^      ^°^;^''%     ^°^;^^V  •  c?^-^'^%    .^°^:^'' 
A>J  ^     "/ 
^S  c^''  ^   ''^^*fc>^.*  f/^  ^    '  ,^^'''  "^   ' 
^  A*^  ^      '  I         s  ■•      At>  ^  A<J  ^ 
9>.  *'«■.>  %^'*"  9d /'o"/.*^  ,#'^        9j  •',?.":  *\*''"^         9.' 
'^.^^ 
;  -  ,y"        95, 
v^^    °''-      V...      .-  J«^ 
A<^  ^ 
^  A^  .  ^         ''  ' 