Traditional  Métis  Transportation  –  Darren  R. Préfontaine,  Todd  Paquin  and
Patrick Young

Module  Objective:   In  this  module,  the  students  will  be informed  about  various
forms  of  transportation  developed  and  used by  the  Métis.  These means  of
transportation were used both  on the land and on water.    The students will  also
learn that  these forms  of  transportation,  especially canoes,  Red River Carts and
York Boats were indispensable in opening up the continent.

Water  Transportation

Since Canada is  such  a  vast  country   containing    a  great  many  geographical

obstacles  as the  Canadian Shield, and the Western  Cordillera, it was only  natural

that   European  explorers  would  use the  country’s  west-to-east  flowing   water

systems to  traverse  the  continent.   The  fur   trade  would   not  have  occurred

without  the  use  of  water   routes  and  that   very  dependable First  Nations

innovation:   the  birch  bark  canoe.   The  Métis   leaned  early  from   their   First

Nations  and French-Canadian ancestors to  be very  adept at  traveling  long  hard

arduous hours a long  western  and northern  water  ways.  Other  modes of  water

transportation that  were used by the Métis  included York boats.

Canoes

The first  system of  transportation  used during  the  fur  trade  was the  canoe, an

ingenious inland  water  vehicle that  Canada’s First  Nations  have used since time

immemorial.              Originally  perfected  from  hollowed-out    logs,  these  sleek,

adaptable  and  versatile  forms  of  transportation  were  indispensable to  the  fur

trade,  but  also to  the  opening  up  of  the  continent.     Alexander Mackenzie and

Peter Pond and a myriad  other  fur  trade  explorers would  never have been able

to  cover  the  vast  expenses  they  did  without  canoes (and  their    First  Nations

guides). The birch bark canoe proved indispensable in the  traffic  of  trade goods

and furs between the European traders and the First Nations and Métis  trappers.

1

Lightweight  and  crafted  entirely   from  indigenous  materials,  the  vessels  were

surprisingly  durable,  maneuverable,  and  portable  over  the  land  connections

between water  routes.

Birch bark canoes were the most popular form  of water  transportation in what  is

now  Canada prior  to  the  arrival  of  Europeans. Birch  bark  canoes are  quite

lightweight and could be carried quite  easily over portages by a small number of

individuals,  depending on  the  size of  the  craft.   Because  they  were  constructed

from  natural  materials, the canoes could be repaired on the move if not  seriously

damaged.  The First Nations  who  lived in the woodlands were heavily dependent

on  birch  bark  canoes  for  movement,  especially when  hunting,  fishing,  trapping

and trading.    People could, of  course, set nets for  fishing  from  their  canoes as

well  as hunt  from  them.   Ducks and other  waterfowl could be dispatched from  a

canoe and  picked  up  when  they  dropped  into  the  water,  and  moose could  be

hunted  while  wading  in  shallows  without  having  to  track  them  in  the  bush.

People in canoes also harvested wild  rice, effectively.

The construction  of  the  birch bark canoes involved  both  men and women.  Bark,

of  course, had to  be gathered and men often  made trips  to  good stands of  birch

trees,  which  could  be  quite  a  distance from  a  post  or  a  settlement.    If  people

were  not  attached  to  a  post,  they  would  make  their   spring  encampments  in

areas where  birch  stands were  readily  accessible.  Women  gathered  spruce or

tamarack  roots,  called wattappe,  which  were  processed  into  the  cords used to

stitch  the bark shingles together.   Pitch, derived from  the sap of coniferous trees,

was  used to  seal the  seams of  the  canoes and  make  them  waterproof.    The

frames of  the canoe were made from  willow  branches, which  had been soaked in

water  to  make it easier to  manipulate  and bend into  the  proper  shapes. If  two

2

people  were  making  a  canoe,  it  would   take  approximately   two   weeks  to

complete the task.

The growing  Metis  population  furnished  the  trade companies with  a large labour

force  to  work  the  inland  water  routes  with,   and  they  were  adept  at  using  the

canoe to  cross the large expanses of land between posts and trappers. The canoe

could  carry  cargo  into   the  country   and  return   with   furs  but  were  not  large

enough to  transport  adequate provisions for  its occupants on long  journeys.  As

a  result,  the  trade  companies  built   strings  of  supply  posts  across Canada  to

provide the traders with  provisions.

Typical sizes of  birch  bark canoes used for  water  transport  in  the  fur  trade  along

relatively   rock-free  routes  were  11  to  13  metres  (36  feet)   long.   These craft

weighed  273 kilograms  (600  pounds)  or  more  and were  carried by  at  least four

men. The canot  de mâitre  or  “Masters  Canoe” were usually 11  to  13 metres long,

often  weighed  275  kilograms,  and  could  carry  ten  crewmembers  and  cargo.  It

was used by the  North  West Company (NWC)  to  move furs and trade goods to

Fort  William  from  Montréal.   By contrast,  the  smaller canot  du nord  or  "North

Canoe", which  was used in more northerly  and rocky routes, was about 8 metres

long and weighed 135 kilograms.

These  vessels  were  considerably  larger  than  the  canoes  used by  Métis  in  their

subsistence  activities.      However,  the  posts  employed  Aboriginal    expertise  in

constructing    these  larger  versions  of  the  original   birch  bark  vessels.  While

eventually  supplanted by the larger and much sturdier  York Boats, the birch bark

canoe played an important  role in the fur  trade and in the exploration  of Canada.

It is interesting  to  note,  however,  that  the  York  boat  replaced the  birch  bark

3

freight  canoes in the Hudson’s Bay Company (HBC), not  the NWC.  Even though

the  prototypes    of  the  York  boats  were  being  put  to  use  prior  to  the

consolidation  of  the  two  trade  companies,  the  NWC  did  not  abandon its  use of

the large canoes in its operations.

York Boats

When  people think   of  watercraft   used in  the  historical  fur  trade,  they  usually

think   of  birch  bark  or  freight   canoes.   However,  York  boats  –  large  shallow

rectangular  sailing  vessels  – were  the  transportation  mainstay  of  the  fur  trade

after  the  1821  merger  of  the  HBC and the  Northwest   Company. Between  1826

and  1835,  Orcadian  (from   the  Orkneys  off   of  Scotland)  and  Métis  craftsmen,

working    for  the  HBC,  developed  the  sturdy  York  boat  for  the  inland  trading

system.     Although  it seems Métis  chief  trader  William  Sinclair should receive

much  of  the  credit  for  its  development.    The need for  such a vehicle, though,

had  been identified   and  a  prototype   had  been experimented  with   late  in  the

eighteenth  century  by  explorers and writers  such as Samuel Hearne, Robert  M.

Ballantyne, and Philip Turnor when the HBC was establishing posts inland.

York  boats  seemed ideal  for   the  river  and  lake  systems  of  the  Hudson  Bay

Drainage Basin, the MacKenzie River System and the Lake Athabasca System. In

shape it  resembled a whaling  boat  (long,  broad  and shallow)  and was steered

with  a rudder  by a steersman who  sat on a platform  at  the  stern.   These boats

navigated  many  terrifying  rapids,  carried  heavier  loads,  and  survived  more

punishment  than  canoes.  These boats  were  launched at  the  ice break-up  in  the

spring and remained in service until  the freeze-up in the fall.   However,  the York

boat’s life  span was limited  to three or four  years.

4

The  York  boat  was  truly   a  massive craft,  easily accommodating  up  to  twelve

men and cargo, and had to  be rowed, not  paddled.  Ranging in size from  nine to

thirteen   metres  in  length,  over  two  metres  in  width,   and  about  one  metre  in

depth,  York  boats  carried  approximately    3,200  kilograms  of  cargo  and  were

rowed  by  six  metre-long   oars.   These long,  broad  boats  were  steered with   a

stern-mounted  rudder, and could navigate with  the assistance of  a mast and sail

– a useful innovation  on  “windy”  Lake Winnipeg  or Lake Athabasca. The size of

each boat varied according to  the route  it was to  traverse.   For instance, a vessel

built  in  1884 for  navigation  of  the  Athabasca and MacKenzie Rivers was 32 feet

(9.75 metres)  long and could carry 112 hundred weight  (5.5 tons).  The cost for  a

boat  of  this  size was $120 to  $140,  with  the  builder  furnishing  the  lumber,  while

the  buyer furnished  the  pitch,  iron,  etc.  Vessels generally  ranged in  size from  20

to  40 feet  (6.l  to  12.2 metres)  in length,  seven to  eight  feet  (2.133 to  2.43 metres)

in  width  and three  to  four  feet  (91.44 to  122 centimetres)  in  depth.   The boats

were capable of  carrying, more or less, about  3,200 kilograms (! 7,000  pounds),

and were rowed with  oars about 20 feet (6.1 metres )long.

5

Prior  to  the  dominance of  steamers after  1859, more  than  200  York boats and

1200 men  – mostly  Métis  – were  traversing  western  and northern   waterways.

Two  or  three  boats  made  up  a  transportation  brigade.     The manager  of  the

trading  store contracted  out  men’s services for  the  trip.   They received half  their

pay  up  front   to  help  support  their   families  while  they  were  away.   The  men

carried  a  minimum    of  personal  items,  while    the  Company  provided  kettles,

frying   pans, tools  and  ropes.   Because  of  the  emphasis on  the  trade  goods,

personal items  had to  be compromised  due to  limited  space in  the  boats.  The

goods,  which  were  being  transported,  were  not  always  “necessities”.  Officers

and their  wives and daughters, on occasion, received pianos and carriages, while

live  bison  calves were  transported  from  Norway  House  to  York  Factory  on  at

least one occasion.

York boat crews usually traveled within  specific HBC districts.   Nonetheless, the

various  crews occasionally  met.    For  instance,  in  anticipation   of  supply  and

6

trading  ships arriving  from  Great Britain,  an annual summer rendezvous of  York

boat crews occurred at York Factory and other  HBC warehouses  on Hudson Bay.

Smaller inland  fur  trade posts sent freighters  in  York boats to  meet ships on the

western  shores of  Hudson Bay.  After  celebrating, and strengthening  kinship and

commercial  bounds,  the  freighters   exchanged furs  and  country   produce  for

trading  goods and supplies before returning  inland.

A crew was generally made up of  a steersman, a bowsman (who  fended of rocks

with   a  large  pole  and  guided  the  boat  through  fast  water),  and  eight  rowers.

These  employees  worked  continuously,  rowing,  portaging,  and  carrying  goods

on trips  commonly  longer than  one thousand miles, such as the  annual trip  from

Portage La Loche to  York Factory and back.  Trips to  and from  York Factory and

Red River were conducted twice  a year in  the  middle  to  late  nineteenth  century

and  were  made  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  goods  to  Red River,  which  had

arrived  at  York  Factory  via  HBC ships.   The  first   York  boats  left   around  the

beginning of June.

The  boatmen  were  commonly  men  who  were  indebted  to  the  posts  and  were

working  their  debt off  by engaging in a trip  to  York Factory.  Many  men trained

for  work  as boaters or  tripmen  when  they  were boys old  enough  to  carry packs

around  the  trade  posts.   In  this  way,  the  posts were  ensured with  a supply  of

men from  which  to  draw  upon  for  packing cargo and boating.   Both  Métis  men

and women  worked  extensively  as backpackers,  portaging  and carrying  goods to

and from  York boats.  By looping  straps around their  foreheads and shoulders to

support  a  load  on  their  backs,  packers could  carry  one  or  several 40-kilogram

parcels in single file  columns over the trails.  Some men carried loads in excess of

80  to  160 kilograms at a time.   The packers had to  have strong  necks and backs

7

in  order  to  support  this  weight    and  had  to  avoid  tripping    over  rocks  or  tree

roots.     Packers  were  expected to  traverse  portages  at  a  rate  of  more  than  a

kilometre  in ten minutes, with  a short rest between marches.

Stops along a water  transport  route  were for  meals and sleeping, and fishing  and

hunting.    These  latter  two  activities  were  common  means of  keeping supplied

with   fresh  food  without  having  to   transport   any.    Camp spots  were  level

sheltered  places upon  which   tents  could  be  erected.    If  passengers were

accompanying  the  brigades, men  would  have to  serve them  their  meals, wash

dishes and set up  their  tents,  though  they  were  paid better  for  these services.

After  a trip,  which  commonly  lasted several weeks, the  men  were  paid and the

merchandise for  the  next  winter’s  supply  was loaded up  to  be transported.   A

feast and a dance were  held for  the  men  at  the  end of  a trip  to  celebrate their

hard  work,  and  the  fact  that  they  had  simply  survived  an  often-dangerous

journey!   Though the work  was arduous and long, many people recounted those

days as very fulfilling and dear to  them.

Portaging  a  York  boat  was  necessary  when  changing  water    routes,  or  when

faced with  dangerous rapids.   Unfortunately,  because of  their  size and weight,

which  was much  greater  than  a canoe, portaging  a York  boat  was an onerous

task. Portaging  was done in  two  stages: one for  moving  the  boat  and the  other

for  moving  cargo.  Unlike  canoes, a York boat  could not  be carried on the  backs

of  its crew. Instead, when moving  a York boat inland, Métis  boatmen had to  cut

a swath  about  three  metres wide  through  the  bush, using felled  trees as rollers.

An  alternative   to  portaging  a  York  boat  past  dangerous  rapids  was  tracking.

Using  ropes  and  harnesses,  the    men  walked  on  shore  and  pulled  the  boat

through  the  water  until  they  bypassed  the  treacherous  stretch.  If  there  were

8

little  or  no shoreline, the  men would  wade chest-deep in  freezing  water.    This

too  could prove dangerous and many drowned attempting  this activity.

Operations  to  build  York  boats typically  commenced in  July or  August.   A boat

builder  and assistant, along with  ten  or twenty  men, traveled to  a suitable stand

of  spruce or  tamarack  trees to  chop down  enough  wood  to  make the  required

number of  boats.  A full  time  boat  builder  employed at Lower  Fort  Garry in 1865

made  an  annual  wage  ranging  from   £35 to  £40.   Some of  the  wages that

temporary  employees at Lower Fort  Garry received in 1868-1869 are as follows:

Work
Boat repair/carpentry
Making  oars

Per
Day
1 oar

Payment

3 Shillings 6 pence to  4 shillings
6 Pence

Skiff building

Day

3 Shillings 6 pence to  4 shillings

Master York boat builders earned £ 30 a year, one of the highest wages paid to  a

non-commissioned officer.

The  workers  cut  the  felled  trees  into    6  to  13  metre  lengths  for  the  different

sections of  the York boat. They lashed the logs into  a raft,  which  was poled back

to  the trading  post with  the aid of a sail.  Once at the post, men cut the logs into

planks  using  a  whip   saw.  The  two-man   whip   saw  teams  could  produce  an

average  of  15  to  25 planks  a  day.   The  boat  builder  and  his  assistant  then

fashioned  the  planks,  keel,  ribs,  and  other  pieces.   Once  built,   the  boat  was

caulked by  rubbing  a mixture  of  oakum,  boiled  pitch,  and  tar  over  its  exterior

surface. The mixture  was burned  over  and rubbed  smooth.  To make  the  craft

watertight, it  was submerged and left  to  soak for  three  days so that  the  wood

and  caulking  swelled. It  took  20  to  30  days to  construct  a York  boat.  In  1884,

York  boat  builders  in  and around  what  is now  Lac La Biche, Alberta  charged

9

$120.00 to  $140.00 per boat. The buyer  had to  supply the  pitch,  iron,  and other

necessary materials.

Land Transportation

In  their  early  history,  the  Métis  were  closely  tied  to  the  water  transportation

systems of  the  fur  trade.      However,  with   the  merger  of  the  two   rival  fur-

trading   companies  (the   NWC  and  the  HBC)  in  1821,  many  Métis  became

unemployed.      In  order  to  make  a  living,  many  of  these  Métis  became

increasingly nomadic and began hunting  bison and trading  with  Americans.  As a

result,  the  Métis  became  very  adept  at  using  various  modes  of  land

transportation  including  Red River carts.  Methods  of  land  transportation  were

very different  than  water  transport  since they  were generally more regional, and

often    ran  north-south    rather  west-east  as  the  water    systems.          Land

transportation  such  as Red River  carts  were  very  useful  and  practical  on  the

southern prairie, where there were few navigable water  systems.

The Métis  Red River Carts.

One of  the  intrinsic  symbols of  Métis  nationhood  is the  Red River cart.  In  fact,

the  logo  for  the  Métis  Nation  of  Alberta  has a Red River carts on  it.   The Red

River cart  has become,  like  the  fur  trade  sash, a passionate and powerful  symbol

of  Métis   nationhood   in  Western  Canada.   These noisy  but   versatile  carts

crisscrossed what   are  now   the  Prairie  Provinces,  Ontario,   North   Dakota,

Montana  and Minnesota.   Among  First  Nations  and Euro-North   Americans the

carts  became identified   with   the  Métis.    In  fact,  “Plains  First  Nations”  sign

language for  the Métis  literally  meant “half-wagon,  half-man!’”

10

While  th e  inspiration  fo r  th e  Red Rive r car t  came fro m  European  carting

traditions,

the  materials  used  were

indigenous

to

the  Plains  and

its

construction  was  distinctly  Métis.  Although

there  were  no  standard

measurements for a Red River cart, it typically had a box measuring two metres

in  length,  one  metre  in  height,  and  approximately  84  centimetres  in  width.  Its

axles  were  two  metres  long,  its  wheels  one  to  two  metres  in  diameter,  and  its

shafts,  measuring  four  metres  each,  ran  from  the  box  to  the  horse  or  ox.  Its

hubs were  usually  made  from  elm,  wheel  rims  from  ash  or  oak,  and  the  axle

from maple.   All  the  carts’  wooden  pieces  were  fashioned  together   by  sinew

and  rope.    When  the  carts  broke  down,  all  that  was  needed  for  their  repair

was  a  bluff  of  trees,  an  axe,  saw,  screw  auger,  and  draw  knife.      Even  the

nails  on  a Métis-made  Red River  cart were wooden, unlike  the  metal  nails used

by  the  fur  trade  companies.  Red  River  carts  made  a  terrible  squealing  noise

when  moving because  their  wooden  axles  and  wheels  could  not  be  effectively

lubricated.    A  First  Nations’  legend  maintains  that  the  bison  deserted  the

Plains  because  they wanted to escape  from the carts’ hideous  noise!

The first  carts were quite  small.  Larger, better-constructed  carts made their  way

onto   the  transportation  scene around  the  start  of  the  nineteenth   century,

possibly  by  1803, when  improved   wheels  were  being  manufactured.    These

larger,  spoked  wheels  were  dished,  or  curved  inward,   and  provided  greater

stability and handling for the carts.

For  the  Métis,   the  Red  River  cart  was  an  all  purpose  utility  vehicle  and  a

makeshift  home.  Métis  families  used  the  Red  River  carts  to  move  their

possessions  while   migrating   or  resource  harvesting.  The  carts  also  provided

migrating   Métis  with   temporary  living  quarters  and  shelter  from  the  elements.

Women  fashioned  decorated covers for  the  carts from  bison hides or  canvas,

11

which  were supported  by  an arched frame  of  cut  saplings. When  disassembled,

Red River  carts  also became temporary  rafts  for  water  crossings.   Once its

wheels  were  removed  and  reattached  under  the  box  and  its  bottom    was

enclosed in  a  buffalo   hide  tarp,  the  cart  and  its  cargo  could  be  rafted  across

rivers  and  streams.   In  the  winter,   the  Red River  cart’s  passenger  box,  when

placed on runners, served  as a temporary  horse-drawn sleigh.

The Red River cart  was also used as defensive mechanism when  the  Métis  were

threatened.     When  the  Métis  had  frequent  battles  over  control  of  the  bison

hunting   grounds  with   the  Sioux  in  the  1840s  and  1850s,  they  often   formed

compact defensive circles with  their  Red River Carts when  they  met  Sioux war

parties.   Inside the circle, women, children, and animals could hide safely, while

men, old and young, would  man the defences. At  the Battle  of  Grand Coteau in

1851,  the  Métis  dug  trenches  and rifle  pits  around  their  defensive circle of  Red

River carts and won a resounding victory  against the Dakota Sioux.  Henceforth,

the  Sioux, impressed  by  Métis  courage and martial  skill,  never  made war  with

the  Métis  again.   Some even fought  with  the  Métis  during  the  1885  Resistance.

The Boers, Dutch  farmers in South Africa, used a similar tactic  against the  Zulus

and the British.

Red River  carts  revolutionized    the  way  trade  goods  were  transported   in  the

western  interior  of  North  America  before  the  advent  of  railways  and

automobiles.  A horse-powered Red River cart could transport  the  same amount

of  cargo  as four  packhorses.  Horse  drawn  Red River  carts  were  able to  carry

more than  200 kilograms at a rate of  up to  80 kilometres  a day.  The same carts

pulled by oxen could carry almost 500 kilograms at a rate of about 30 kilometres

a day.   By tying  several carts together,  one person could control  a team of  oxen

12

and  carts  and  usually  avoid  getting    stuck  in  mud,  a  common  problem  for

individual  carts.  These  innovations  decreased freighting   costs, while  increasing

the   amount   of   goods  transported.   Red  River  carts  hauled  such  goods  as

pemmican, buffalo  hides, furs,  moccasins, decorated tanned  skin clothes, sugar,

tobacco, tea, powder,  shot, bullets,  point  blankets, cloth,  vermilion,  axes, knives,

files, copper kettles, guns and alcohol.

As  the  Métis  became free  traders  in  the  1830s and  1840s, Red River  carts

eventually   superseded  York  boats  in  the  volume  of  freight   hauled.  By  1869,

approximately  2,500 carts left  the  Red River Settlement  for  St. Paul, Minnesota,

outside of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Hudson’s Bay Company.  Cart trails  established

by  Métis  freighters  connected trading  centres and posts, a vital  development  in

flood  prone  areas such as the  Missouri,  Red and Assiniboine river  basins.  The

most  important    Red River  cart  trails  connected  the  Red  River  settlement   to

what’s  now  Pembina,  North   Dakota,  and  St.  Paul,  Minnesota.     Other  trails

paralleled  settlement  along  the  Assiniboine  River  from  Portage  La  Prairie  and

then  Fort  Ellice.  At  this  point,  the  trail  divided  into  two,  with  one branch going

to  Fort  Pelly in the north  while  the other  moved westward  to  Fort  Qu’Appelle, in

present-day  Saskatchewan.  This  western  branch  then  split  with   one  segment

tracing  its  way  to  the  Cypress  Hills  while  the  other  segment  going  to  Batoche,

Fort  Carleton, Battleford,  and the vicinity  of Edmonton.

Carts were  also used to  transport  goods into  the  forest.  Prior  to  the  building  of

the  railways  in  the  early  twentieth  century  in  northeastern  Alberta,  cart

transportation actually  superseded watercraft  use.  For instance, in 1889, all the

goods received at Lac La Biche arrived overland via freighters  from  Calgary. The

cost for  shipping materials along this route  was $5.50 for  first  class freight,  $5.24

13

for  second-class freight  and $4.90 for  third  class freight.   Carts transported  goods

from  St. Paul Minnesota  to  Lac La Biche then  York boats hauled the cargo down

the Athabasca River.

With  the  coming  of  transcontinental  railways  in  the  late  nineteenth  century,

opportunities   to  haul  freight  on  Red River  carts  greatly  diminished.  However,

even as European homesteaders entered  the  Prairie West,  the  Métis  used Red

River carts to  haul  wood,  seneca root,  buffalo  bones and other  raw  materials  to

market.   Throughout  western  North  America, many  museums and local heritage

centres have samples of  Red River Carts on display.  In places such as the  Métis

Farm,  in  Lebret,  Saskatchewan,  the  Métis  still  make  Red River  carts  to  better

connect with  the lives of their  ancestors.

14

Other modes of Land Transportation:  Snowshoes, Dogs and Horses

Prior to  using the more familiar  Red River carts, the  Métis  also used snowshoes,

dogs and horses for  transportation.     Snowshoes were used in places were horses

could not  travel  such as the  boreal forest  in wintertime.  Snowshoe travel  among

the  Métis  was  definitely   a  carry-over  from   their   First  Nations  foremothers’

cultures.    Snowshoes greatly   eased movement   in  the  wintertime  and  were

invaluable  to  trappers  and  traders  traveling  overland.  Made  of  lightweight

materials  and covering  a large  oval  or  circular  surface area, these wonderfully

engineered items allowed the wearer to  walk  upon several feet  of snow. In their

most  simple  form,  snowshoes are  circular  hoops  of  wood  with   netting   and  a

boot  binding  inside.    The  more  expertly  crafted  items  are  remarkable  in  their

craftsmanship and durability.

Snowshoe frames were  fashioned from  saplings, which  were  peeled and boiled

to  allow  the  maker  to  shape them.   An  important   feature  of  good  snowshoes

was  to  maintain  an  even  grain  around  the  frame,  which  gave  the  frame

resilience and  a  long  life.   Birch  wood  is a favourite   because  of  its  toughness,

lightness and workability.  Weaving  wet  rawhide, or babiche, inside the  wooden

frame,  made  the  webbing.    When  it  dried,  the  rawhide  became very  taut.

Beaver  and  caribou  hide  are  the  best  materials  to  use  as a  weaving  babiche

because  they  do  not  stretch  much  after  being  attached  to  a frame,  even when

wet.   Moose hide, though  of  lower  quality  than  beaver or caribou hide, is widely

used in the western Sub-Arctic.

Men  typically  built  the  frames of  snowshoes, preparing,  shaping and binding  the

saplings. It was part  of  the  woman’s role to  prepare line  for  and knit  the  men’s

15

snowshoes that  he  wore  for  traveling  the  trapline  and  hunting  in  the  winter.

However, many men were practiced in all the skills required to  make snowshoes.

It was an essential skill to  have if one was on the trapline  or hunting  particularly

if an old pair broke or an unseasonable snowstorm  caught a person unawares.

The First  Nations  used dogs as beasts of  burden since time  immemorial.     The

Métis  also  realized  the  usefulness of  the  animals  in  transporting    people  and

goods in  remote  locales.  Dogs were  used to  pack equipment  when  men  went

hunting,  carrying  blankets  and  food  on  their  backs  while  the  hunters  marched

on snowshoes. When breaking a camp, people would  attach travois  to  the backs

of  their  dogs to  transport  the  items people did not  have enough hands to  carry.

Teams of  dogs  also  pulled  carioles.   The  Métis  decorated  their   carioles by

painting  them  and decorated the  dog  harnesses,  blankets  and packsaddles  with

tassels, the  bushy tails  of  fur  animals and bells.  Dogs also pulled larger  sleighs

called  jumpers,  which   could  be  used  for   transporting   goods  as  well  as  for

traveling  in.   Toboggans were  used by  people to  carry  items  in  the  winter  and

from  time  to time  dog teams were attached to  the toboggans.

A  team  of  between  8  and  15  dogs was  required  to  pull  loaded  sleds,  and  they

could  travel  for  hours  without  rest.   Dogs  were  a  relatively   cheap form  of

transportation.   They were fed from  scraps from  kills, the owners could eat them

in  an  emergency  and  they  were  self-propagating   with   puppies  replacing  the

dogs, which  could  no  longer  pull  sleds.  In  the  north,  between  Fort  McMurray

and Fort  Chipewyan, dog teams were the primary  means of transporting  mail for

decades  as well  as being an important   means of  conveying the  spoils of  hunting

and  trapping,  moving  camps and  aiding  in  the  subsistence  economy  of  Métis

families   in   hauling   commercial   goods.  However,   with    the   advent   of

16

snowmobiles,  the  railroad  and  airplane,  many  communities  abandoned  the

habitual  use of dog teams

Horsemanship and the  use of  the  horse in transportation was a defining  trait  of

the  Plains Métis  who  made their  living  as bison hunters  and post-provisioners.

They were riders par excellence, able to  ride at full  gallop through  a stampeding

herd  of  bison  while  shooting  and  reloading  muzzle-loading  guns.    The  Plains

Métis  were  the  dominant    horsemen  of  the  Prairies  in  the  middle  nineteenth

century,  unrivalled  in  their  use of  the  horse  and  gun.   This lifestyle  carried  on

longest  amongst  those  Métis  who  had  undergone  acculturation  into  Plains

Indians  groups,  often   long  after  other  Métis  had  given  up  the  bison  hunting

lifestyle.      On  the  Plains  of  North   America,  most  of  the  horses  used  by

Indigenous  horse  people  came from  Spanish  America,  in  what  is  now  Mexico.

However,  some  Métis   horses may  have  came  from   Lower  Canada, which

produced  the  distinctively   short  but  sturdy  Cheval canadien or  the  "Canadian

Horse" a descendant of  the  very  same war  ponies used by  Norman  Knights  to

conquer England in 1066.

Aside from  using  fleet-footed   horses for  hunting   and  travel,  packhorses  were

commonly  employed  in  the  overland  movement  of  camps and  supplies and  to

pull  Red River carts.  Horses also pulled  carioles, cutters  and toboggans in  the

winter.   The cariole, a small sled made from  tanned buffalo  hides, was trimmed

with   ribbons,  bells  and  paintings  and  was  used primarily   for  pleasure.   The

runners  were  constructed  from  birch,  as was the  cariole frame.   In  the  winter,

the  Métis  took  the  wheels  off  their  Red River  carts  and  the  horses pulled  the

passenger box of the cart over the snow.

17

Questions and Activities:

1) What  were some of  the  boats used in  the  fur  trade?  What  purpose did each
vehicle  serve? What  sort  of  natural  materials  were  these  boats  made  from?
How  do you think  these boats would  match up against today's fibreglass crafts?

2) Go to  a museum or  surf  the  World  Wide  Web  and find  an example of  an old
fur  trade  canoe or  York boat.    Then study  how  it is made.   Make notes and a
few  sketches or take photographs and borrow  books from  your  school and public
library.    Draft  your  own  design and collect the necessary raw materials to  make
your  own  scale  model.    Popcycle sticks and other  pieces  of  processed  wood  or
plastic may be used, however,  birch  bark, willow  and other  softwood  branches
and twigs  would  provide you with  a more authentic  model. Stain and then apply
varnish to  your  scale model.   For sails, use a nice place of  cloth.   This is a fairly
labour  intensive  project.     After  doing  this,  you  will  appreciate the  efforts  of
Métis  and other  Aboriginal  crafts  people to  construct  authentic  canoes and York
boats.

3) Why  did the York boat eventually  replace the canoe as the primary  vehicle of
the  fur  trade?   What  vehicles eventually  replaced the  York  boat  as Rupert's
Land's main transportation source?

4) With  raw  materials  and processed  wood  products  and plastics design a Red
River cart  based on  examples in  your  local museum, the  World  Wide  Web or  in
books.

5) Why  was the Red River cart such a practical vehicle?  In what  ways were they
used by the Métis?

6) What  industry  was the Red River cart used for?   Why  were Red River carts so
popular?   The historic  Métis  had the  ability  to  adapt and change to  cultural  and
economic  activities.   After  the  fall  of  the  great  fur  trade  some time  after  1840
what  trade  did  they  participate  in  which  they  extensively  used Red River carts?
What  were some of  the goods, which  would  have likely  been carried, in a typical
Red River cart?  How  big could Red River cart brigades get?   Were they  like the
"Wagon Trains" from  the American West?

7) Why  has the  Red River  cart  become such an  emotional  symbol  for  Métis
nationhood?   As gens  de libre  or "Free People", in what  ways did the Métis  use
their  Red River carts to  defy others?

8) What  was similar  about  the  Red River Cart and fur  trade  routes  used by  the
Métis?  What   was  the  extent  of  these  routes?   Did  these  overlap?  Are  these
transcontinental    transportation  systems  similar  to   highways  and  railways?
Draw  maps of  each of  these transportation  systems and compare them.      By
engaging in  this  activity,   you  will  see  that  the  fur  trade  really  did  open up  the
western half of Canada.

9) What  innovations  in transportation made the Red River cart obsolete?

10) In  what  conditions  could a dog sled be used?  What  advantages were there
in  running  a  dog  team  compared  to  a  team  of  oxen  pulling  Red River  carts?
Were there any disadvantages, which  you could think  of?

18

11) How  did a Métis  boat  builder  construct  canoes and other  watercraft?   What
materials were used?  When  did construction  of  York boats usually begin? Make
a list  of  items used to  construct  a York boat  and make an outline  of  the various
stages in making a York boat

13) List the various kinds of  vehicles that  the Métis  traditionally used. Why  were
these vehicles used?  In  the  past  why  was water  transportation  favoured  over
land?

14) Why  were  snowshoes  such a  valuable  means of  transportation?    How  are
they  made and what  are the  best items  to  use in  their  construction?    Go to  a
museum  and  find  a  pair  of  snowshoes.  What  kinds  of  materials  were  used in
their  construction?   What  kinds of  materials could a modern  pair of  snowshoes
be made of?    If  you are lucky enough, buy a pair of  snowshoes at a garage sale.
When  winter  comes try  them  out,  snowshoeing is a fun  winter  activity,  which
expend a great deal of energy.

Sources:

Barkwell,  Lawrence J.,  Dorion,  Leah and Préfontaine,  Darren  R.  Editors.   Metis
Legacy.    Winnipeg  and  Saskatoon:   The Louis  Riel  Institute   and  the  Gabriel
Dumont  Institute,  2001.

Brown,  A. E.  Editor.  Papers  read before  the  Historical  and  Scientific  Society of
Manitoba,  edited by A. E. Brown. Series III, Number 28 1971-1972:8-15. Winnipeg:
Hignell  Printing  Limited,  1972.

Burgess,   J. A., “Snowshoes”, The Beaver: Magazine of  the  North   (March  1941),
pp. 24-28.

Campbell, Maria.  Riel’s People  - How  the  Métis  Lived.   Reprinted.    Vancouver:
Douglas & MacIntyre,  Vancouver, 1992.

Cardinal, Phyllis  and  Dale  Ripley.  Canada’s  People: The  Metis.      Edmonton:
Plains Publishing Inc., 1987.

Christensen,  Deanna,  “’Steamboat  Bill’  of  Cumberland  House”,  The  Beaver:
Magazine of  the North.   Outfit 305(1974 – 3), pp. 8-31.

Dorion,  Leah, Paquin, Todd and Préfontaine,  Darren R.  The Metis:  Our  People,
Our Story.  Multimedia  CD-ROM.  Edmonton:  Arnold  Publishing and the  Gabriel
Dumont  Institute,  2000.

Dorion,  John  and  Betty.   Apihtowkosan:   The  story  of  the  Métis  Nation   in
Western Canada.    Saskatoon: Saskatchewan Indian Cultural College, 1982.

Ens, Gerhard, J. Homeland to  Hinterland:  The Changing Worlds of  the Red River
Métis  in the Nineteenth  Century, 1996.

Farnham,  Katherine.   Beaver,  Beads  and  Pemmican:  Canada’s  Fur  Traders.
Canadian      Edmonton:   Social Sciences Services Ltd., 1987.

19

Gilman, Carolyn. Where Two Worlds Meet:  The Great Lakes Fur Trade.  St. Paul:
Minnesota  Historical  Society, 1982.

Giraud, Marcel. The Métis  in the Canadian West (Volume  I and II).  Translated by
George Woodcock.   Edmonton:  University  of Alberta Press, Edmonton,  1986.

Glover, R.,  “York Boats”,  The Beaver: Magazine of  the North  (March  1949), pp.
19-23.

Harrison,  Julia  D.   Metis  -  People between  Two  Worlds.      Vancouver:   The
Glenbow-Alberta  Institute  in association with  Douglas & McIntyre,  1985.

Kaye, Barry and John Alwin,  “The Beginnings of  Wheeled Transport in Western
Canada”, Great Plains Quarterly   4(1984 – 2), pp. 121-134.

May,  David.   Editor.  Mud  Roads and  Strong  Backs: The  History   of  the  Métis
Settlement  of  Gift    Lake.  Edmonton:    Alberta  Federation  of  Métis  Settlement
Associations, 1984.

McCullough  Edward J. and Michael  Maccagno.  Lac La Biche and the  Early Fur
Traders.  Occasional Publication    Number  29.   Edmonton:  University  of  Alberta
Press, Edmonton,  1991.

McDonald, A.A., “H.B.C. Inland Transport: I. Building  the York Boat”, The Beaver:
Magazine of the North  (October 1923a), pp. 19-21.

McDonald,  A.A., “H.B.C. Inland  Transport:  II.  Details of  the  H.B.C. Transport”,
The Beaver: Magazine of the North  (November  1923b), pp. 52-53.

McDonald,  A.A.  ““H.B.C.  Inland  Transport:  III.  Voyage  in  a  York  Boat”,   T h e
Beaver: Magazine of the North  (December 1923c), pp. 92-93.

McLean, Don.  Home  From  the  Hill:  A History  of  the  Métis  in  Western  Canada.
Second Edition.       Regina:   Gabriel Dumont  Institute   of  Native  Studies and
Applied Research, 1988.

North  Slave Métis  Alliance, “Strong  Like Two People: North  Salve Métis  History”
in Lawrence J. Barkwell, Leah Dorion  and Darren R. Préfontaine, Editors.  Metis
Legacy.    Winnipeg  and  Saskatoon:   The Louis  Riel  Institute   and  the  Gabriel
Dumont  Institute,  2001, pp. 135-156.

Payment, Diane P. “The Métis  Nation  of  the Northwest  Territories:   The Historic
Athabasca-Mackenzie” in  in  Lawrence  J.  Barkwell,  Leah Dorion  and  Darren  R.
Préfontaine,  Editors.   Metis  Legacy.   Winnipeg  and Saskatoon:  The Louis Riel
Institute  and the Gabriel Dumont  Institute,  2001, pp. 157-168.

Poling, Jim Sr.  The Canoe: An Illustrated  History.    Toronto:   Key Porter  Books
Limited,  2002.

Vrooman,  Nicholas  C.  P.  “’Rielization’  of  the  Greater  Métis  Traditional  Historic
Homeland”  in  in  Lawrence J. Barkwell,  Leah Dorion  and Darren  R. Préfontaine,
Editors.   Metis  Legacy.   Winnipeg  and Saskatoon:  The Louis Riel Institute  and
the Gabriel Dumont  Institute,  2001, pp. 37-70.

20

Weekes, Mary.  The Last Buffalo  Hunter.    Saskatoon: Fifth  House Publishing,
1994.

21


