---
title: "Batoche and St. Laurent-Grandin, Saskatchewan"
type: entity
relates_to: [xavier-letendredit-batoche, carlton-trail, south-saskatchewan-river, st-laurent-saskatchewan]
---

# Batoche and St. Laurent-Grandin, Saskatchewan

> [Source: saskatchewan-metis-communities.md, "Batoche and St. Laurent-Grandin, Saskatchewan"]

> This Metis settlement along the South Saskatchewan River is named after Metis trader and businessman Xavier Letendré dit Batoche. It is located on the Carlton Trail, a Red River Cart trail. Batoche also operated a river ferry. François Xavier's grandfather, Jean Baptiste Letendré had been wintering in the Fort Carlton area since the late 1850s. The Metis fleeing Manitoba after the 1869-70 Resistance largely settled this town, along with St. Louis, St. Laurent, and Duck Lake. This was not the first Batoche community in Saskatchewan. The nickname was shared with François Xavier Letendré's grandfather, Jean-Baptiste Letendré who worked at Fort a la Corne in 1810. There are references to a Batoche Post about three miles west of the Forks of the Saskatchewan River and Jean-Baptiste Letendré is the likely source of the name. 1 Xavier Letendré dit Batoche had established a store in the vicinity of the St. Laurent mission on the west bank of the South Saskatchewan River in 1866. At that time all the wintering Metis were located on the west bank for easier access to Fort Carlton. The St. Laurent settlement on the west side also had easy access to the missions of St. Laurent and Sacre Coeur at Duck Lake. The first ferry crossing the south branch of the Saskatchewan River was established where the Carlton Trail crossed the river on the road to St. Laurent, Duck Lake and Fort Carlton. Xavier Letendré dit Batoche established this ferry in 1871. With the establishment of Batoche's ferry the river the Metis took up lots on the east side and this village became known as Batoche.


> [Source: saskatchewan-metis-communities.md, "Batoche and St. Laurent-Grandin"]

Batoche and St. Laurent-Grandin, Saskatchewan: This Metis settlement along
 the South Saskatchewan River is named after Metis trader and businessman Xavier
 Letendré dit Batoche. It is located on the Carlton Trail, a Red River Cart trail. Batoche
 also operated a river ferry. François Xavier’s grandfather, Jean Baptiste Letendré had
 been wintering in the Fort Carlton area since the late 1850s. The Metis fleeing Manitoba
 after the 1869-70 Resistance largely settled this town, along with St. Louis, St. Laurent,
 and Duck Lake. This was not the first Batoche community in Saskatchewan. The
 nickname was shared with François Xavier Letendré’s grandfather, Jean-Baptiste
 Letendré who worked at Fort a la Corne in 1810. There are references to a Batoche Post
 about three miles west of the Forks of the Saskatchewan River and Jean-Baptiste
 Letendré is the likely source of the name. 1 Xavier Letendré dit Batoche had established
 a store in the vicinity of the St. Laurent mission on the west bank of the South
 Saskatchewan River in 1866. At that time all the wintering Metis were located on the
 west bank for easier access to Fort Carlton. The St. Laurent settlement on the west side
 also had easy access to the missions of St. Laurent and Sacre Coeur at Duck Lake. The
 first ferry crossing the south branch of the Saskatchewan River was established where
 the Carlton Trail crossed the river on the road to St. Laurent, Duck Lake and Fort
 Carlton. Xavier Letendré dit Batoche established this ferry in 1871. With the
 establishment of Batoche’s ferry the river the Metis took up lots on the east side and this
