---
title: "Fort Carlton, Saskatchewan"
type: entity
relates_to: [north-saskatchewan-river, james-bird, hudson-bay-company, 1885-resistance]
---

# Fort Carlton, Saskatchewan

> [Source: saskatchewan-metis-communities.md, "Fort Carlton: Fort Carlton was located on the banks of the North Saskatchewan at the ford of Montée. Built in 1810 by Hudson's Bay Company employee James Bird, under Factor John Peter Pruden. It was the third Fort Carlton to be constructed in the Saskatchewan district and was located to oppose the nearby North West Company post La Montee. The first had been built in 1795 at the junction of the North and South Saskatchewan Rivers, and the second, 150 kilometers upstream on the South Saskatchewan. At its North Saskatchewan location, it served as a strategic crossroads for not only river travel, but also overland wagon trails that stretched from Fort Garry in the south, to Fort Edmonton in the west, and from Green Lake to the Churchill River. Supplies, not furs, were its main stock in trade; situated on the doorstep of the great buffalo plains of the west, the Fort served as a key distribution point for pemmican and "country produce" - locally available foods such as venison, fish and berries. Each year, if the buffalo hunt was good, hundreds of kilograms of pemmican fat and dried meat were collected by the Fort and shipped to far-flung trading posts. The operations of the rival Hudson's Bay Company and North West Company were even more intertwined than usual at the Fort Carlton: during its early years, the two companies shared the same Fort.]

> [Source: saskatchewan-metis-communities.md, "Fort Carlton"]

> At the time of the 1885 Resistance Fort Carlton was run by Charles N. Garson. It was subsequently destroyed by an accidental fire set by an HBC employee and never re-opened. Well-known fur traders who ran the fort were Patrick Small, Joseph Brazeau, Nicol Finlayson, Richard Hardisty Jr., Arthur Pruden and Lawrence Clarke. 2


> [Source: saskatchewan-metis-communities.md, "Fort Carlton"]

Fort Carlton: Fort Carlton was located on the banks of the North Saskatchewan at the
 ford of Montée. Built in 1810 by Hudson's Bay Company employee James Bird, under
 Factor John Peter Pruden. It was the third Fort Carlton to be constructed in the
 Saskatchewan district and was located to oppose the nearby North West Company post
 La Montee. The first had been built in 1795 at the junction of the North and South
 Saskatchewan Rivers, and the second, 150 kilometers upstream on the South
 Saskatchewan. At its North Saskatchewan location, it served as a strategic crossroads
 for not only river travel, but also overland wagon trails that stretched from Fort Garry in
 the south, to Fort Edmonton in the west, and from Green Lake to the Churchill River.
 Supplies, not furs, were its main stock in trade; situated on the doorstep of the great
 buffalo plains of the west, the Fort served as a key distribution point for pemmican and
 "country produce" - locally available foods such as venison, fish and berries. Each year,
 if the buffalo hunt was good, hundreds of kilograms of pemmican fat and dried meat
 were collected by the Fort and shipped to far-flung trading posts. The operations of the
 rival Hudson's Bay Company and North West Company were even more intertwined
 than usual at the Fort Carlton: during its early years, the two companies shared the same
 Fort.




                                    Fort Carlton 1871
    At the time of the 1885 Resistance Fort Carlton was run by Charles N. Garson. It was
    subsequently destroyed by an accidental fire set by an HBC employee and never re-
    opened. Well-known fur traders who ran the fort were Patrick Small, Joseph Brazeau,
    Nicol Finlayson, Richard Hardisty Jr., Arthur Pruden and Lawre
